Nethi, S. (2020). A literature review on Employee motivation. 11. https://jespublication.com/upload/2020-1106182.pdf

‌

Vol 11, Issue 6,June/2020
ISSN NO:0377-9254
www.jespublication.com PageNo:1247
A literature review on Employee motivation
Sireesha Nethi
Assistant Professor, Department of MBA, Samskruti College of Engineering and Technology, Kondapu (V), Ghatkesar (M),
Medchal (D), Telangana. E-mail ID: siri.nethi@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Research on employee motivation has attracted both
the academics and corporate companies from the
past few years. In the present study, possible
dimensions of motivation have been extracted and
explain about its direct and indirect impact on
motivation techniques. This study has examined the
multidimensionality of motivation from the existing
literature and present a conceptual framework based
on it and explains about various motivation
techniques which are having a positive impact on
quality of life, performance of the employee in the
organization and employee satisfaction about their
work. The originality of this study lies in its
theoretical framework where an attempt has made to
come up with a construct nature having dimensions
that are directly or indirectly influences employee
motivation. In the previous research papers few
dimensions of motivation were used to explain the
different models of motivation theory which has
direct impact on employee motivation in the
organization. However the models need to be
validated by using quantitative measures. To make
the study more relevant, only those studies were
included which were published on motivation in the
last few years. In order to study the various issues
related to employee motivation, a large body of
literature mainly from different journals and books
of different authors have been take in.
KEY WORDS
Employee motivation, Motivational dimensions,
Employee performance, Motivation techniques,
Motivation theories.
INTRODUCTION
The motivation perceptions of all types of
employees throughout the world are fast changing in
response to a number of key variables. The
conventional motivational rein forcers either
extrinsic or intrinsic are gradually losing
importance. What exactly can motivate again varies
with time and space.
Motivation directly links to individual performance
that gain to organization performance and as a
catalyser for all individual employees working for
an organization to enhance their working
performance or to complete task in much better way
than they usually do.
Organization runs because of people working for it,
and each person contributes toward achieving the
ultimate goal of an organization.
Panagiotakopoulos: concluded that factors affecting
staff motivation at a period where the financial
rewards are kept to the least leads to stimulate
employee performance, management personnel’s
responsibility to motivate their employees to work
as per the expectation to enhance the organization’s
performance.
Dysvik and Kuvaas: concluded that intrinsic
motivation was the strongest predictor of turnover
intention and relationship between masteryapproach goals and turnover intention was only
positive for employees, low in intrinsic motivation.
The only thing organization needs to do is to give
employees with ample resources and platform to do.
As per Kuo: a successful organization must
combine the strengths and motivations of internal
employees and respond to external changes and
demands promptly to show the organization’s value.
In this paper, we have taken various techniques of
motivation from existing literature, and managed to
make flow of motivation from young-age employees
to old-age employees. From organization
perspective managers need to understand the flow of
motivation, it helps them to create a culture where
employees always get motivated to do better.
Barney and Steven Elias: They found that with
extrinsic motivation there exist a significant
interaction between job stress, flex time, and country
of residence. Leaders know that at the heart of every
productive and successful business lies a thriving
organizational culture and hardworking people
collaborate passionately to produce great results. In
the body of literature, various frameworks are used
Vol 11, Issue 6,June/2020
ISSN NO:0377-9254
www.jespublication.com PageNo:1248
by the researchers based on theory of motivation,
with only few dimensions of motivation.
LITERATURE REVIEW
One of the most important functions of management
is to create willingness amongst the employees to
perform in the best of their abilities. Therefore
the role of a leader is to arouse interest in
performance of employees in their jobs. In a
complex and dynamic environment, leader of the
organization used to create the environment in
which employee feel trusted and are empowered to
take decisions in the organization which leads to
enhance motivation level of employee and
ultimately organizational performance are
enhanced. Fredrick W Taylor was one of the first
theorists to attempt to understand employee
motivation. His theory of scientific management,
also referred to as Taylorism, analyses the
productivity of the workforce.
Taylor's basic theory of motivation is that workers
are motivated by money. He viewed employees not
as individuals, but as pieces of a larger workforce; in
doing so his theory stresses that giving employee's
individual tasks, supplying them with the best tools
and paying them based on their productivity was the
best way to motivate them.
Taylor's theory developed in the late 1890s and can
still be seen today in industrial engineering and
manufacturing industries. In the mid-1920s another
theorist, Elton Mayo, began studying the workforce.
His study of the Hawthorne Works, lead him to his
discovery of the Hawthorne effect. The Hawthorne
effect is the idea that people change their behaviour
as a reaction to being observed.
Mayo found that employee's productivity increased
when they knew they were being watched. He also
found that employees were more motivated when
they were allowed to give input on their working
conditions and that input was valued.
Smith and Rupp stated that performance is a role of
individual motivation, organizational strategy, and
structure and resistance to change, is an empirical
role relating motivation in the organization.
Likewise, advancement of human resources
through rewards, monetary incentives, and
organizational behaviour modification has
generated a large volume of debate in the human
resource and sales performance field. According to
Orpen better the relationship between mentors and
mentees in the formal mentoring program, the more
mentees are motivated to work hard and committed
to their organization.
Likewise, Malina and Selto conducted a case study
in one corporate setting by using balance score card
(BSC) method and found out that organizational
outcomes would be greater if employees are
provided with positive motivation (2001).
The establishment of operations-based targets will
help the provision of strategic feedback by allowing
the evaluation of actual performance against the
operations-based targets. Goal directed behaviour
and strategic feedback are expected to enhance
organizational performance. Kunz and Pfaff stated
no substantive reason to fear an undermining effect
of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation (2002).
Decoene and Bruggeman in their study developed
and illustrated a model of the relationship between
strategic alignment, motivation and organizational
performance in a BSC context and find that effective
strategic alignment empowers and motivates
working executives (2006).
Leaders motivate people to follow a participative
design of work in which they are responsible and get
it together, which make them responsible for their
performance. Monetary rewards can be a very
powerful determinant of employee motivation and
achievement. Garg and Rastogi identified the key
issues of job design research and practice to
motivate employees’ performance and concluded
that a dynamic managerial learning framework is
required to enhance employees’ performance to
meet global challenges.
Vuori and Okkonen stated that motivation helps to
share knowledge through an intra-organizational
social media platform which can help the
organization to reach its goals and objectives (2012).
Den and Verburg found the impact of high
performing work systems, also called human
resource practices, on perceptual measures of firm
performance (2004).
Ashmos and Duchon recognizes that employees
have both a mind and a spirit and seek to find
meaning and purpose in their work, and an
aspiration to be part of a community, hence making
their jobs worthwhile and motivating them to do at a
Vol 11, Issue 6,June/2020
ISSN NO:0377-9254
www.jespublication.com PageNo:1249
high level with a view to personal and social
development(2000).
METHODOLOGY
The primary objective to write this review is to
highlight the flow of motivation and reveals what
motivation technique works more efficiently in
different stages of life. This study provides useful
managerial implication for employee motivation in
an organization. The dimensions are made fit into a
model that can benefit organization to enhance their
performance; however, the model needs to validate
through case study or quantitative study. To study
the various issues highlighted in this study related to
employee motivation, this study reviews a large
body of literature mainly in different journals. Once
all the issues have been identified, each issue is used
as a keyword to search the relevant literature. To
make the study more current only those studies are
included which are published in previous years.
Table 1 show that the number of articles or reviews
published in last one decade.
Table 1 Article or review published on motivation
Year No. of article or
review published
on motivation
% increase in
publication
2000 3412 7.05
2001 3580 4.92
2002 3995 11.59
2003 4643 16.22
2004 5125 10.38
2005 5878 14.63
2006 6429 9.37
2007 6943 7.99
2008 7585 9.24
2009 8501 2.07
2010 9173 7.90
2011 9861 7.90
2012 10679 8.29
2013 11858 9.26
2014 11924 10.01
2015 12001 9.59
2016 12258 7.98
2017 12732 5.89
2018 13231 4.46
2019 13256 2.98
DIMENSIONS OF MOTIVATION
Training Training refers to ‘‘the systematic
accretion of skills, command, concepts or mind-set
leads to improve performance’’ (Lazazzara and
Bombelli 2011). Baldwin et al. (1991) indicates that
individuals with higher pre-training motivation on
the basis of their willingness to attend training have
greater learning outcomes as compared to
individuals heaving lower pre-training motivation.
Commeiras et al. (2013) point out that traineeship is
continuing to grow. In business, context training
basically refers to action of teaching employees and
providing proper knowledge and skills to make
themselves job fit as well as organization fit.
Training teaches employees how to work and
enhance their skills, hence motivate them to achieve
the common goal of organization as well as of
employee. In the today’s competitive world, every
organization wants to achieve competitive edge over
their competitors and be impossible to achieve
without employee involvement, which forces
management to motivate their employees by
different means.
 Monetary incentives
As summarized by Park (2010), monetary incentive
acts as a stimulus for greater action and inculcates
zeal and enthusiasm toward work; it helps an
employee in recognition of achievement. Likewise,
Beretti et al. (2013) discussed that monetary
incentives used to build a positive environment and
maintain a job interest, which is consistent among
the employee and offer a spur or zeal in the
employees for better performance. For reason,
monetary incentive motivate employees and
Vol 11, Issue 6,June/2020
ISSN NO:0377-9254
www.jespublication.com PageNo:1250
enhance commitment in work performance, and
psychologically satisfy a person and leads to job
satisfaction, and shape the behaviour or outlook of
subordinate toward work in the organization.
Job transfer
The work of Azizi and Liang (2013) indicated that
workforce flexibility can be achieved by crosstraining and improved via job rotation. In the same
way, Eguchi (2004) concluded that job transfer plays
a significant role in preventing workers from
performing influence activities for private help. As
summarized by AsensioCuesta et al. (2012) job
rotation provides benefits to both workers and
management in an organization and prevents
musculoskeletal disorders, cast out fatigue and
increases job satisfaction and morale. As a result, job
transfer gives the opportunity to learn multiple skills
and outlooks to the workers. It avoids the dullness
caused by monotonous jobs and simultaneously
brings smoothness in technological job with the help
of handling different circumstances at different
levels and it leads to effective learning of many
aspects in the organization.
Job satisfaction
In (2011), Parvin and Kabir studied the tested factors
affecting job satisfaction for pharmaceutical
companies and described job satisfaction as how
content an individual is with his or her job, and
viewed job satisfaction is not the same as
motivation, although clearly linked. Similarly,
Pantouvakis and Bouranta (2013) indicated job
satisfaction as a consequence of physical features
and as an antecedent of interactive features.
Wickramasinghe (2009) investigated that gender
and tenure are significant in job satisfaction
measurement. So here it can be said that job
satisfaction is often determined by how well
outcome meet or exceed expectations. For example,
a good work environment and good work conditions
can increase employee job satisfaction and the
employees will try to give their best which can
increase the employee work performance.
Promotion
A study by Garcı´a et al. (2012) identified that
perceptions of promotion systems affect
organizational justice and job satisfaction. Likewise,
Koch and Nafziger (2012) specified that promotions
are desirable for most employees, only because they
work harder to compensate for their
‘‘incompetence.’’ As a result, promotion at regular
interval of time has an optimistic approach behind
and they are generally given to satisfy the
psychological requirements of employees in the
organization.
Achievement
The work of Hunter et al. (2012) defines that
achievement is a unique and specialized form of
organizational performance. As per Satyawadi and
Ghosh (2012), employees are motivated to a greater
extent by achievement and self-control. Now this
can be understood: an employee who is achievement
motivated seeks achievement, bringing realistic but
challenging goals, and betterment in the job. There
is a strong need for feedback from the higher
officials in the organization as to achievement and
progress, and a need for a sense of attainment.
Working conditions
In (2012), Jung and Kim stated that good work
environment and good work conditions can increase
employee job satisfaction and an employee
organizational commitment. So the employees will
try to give their best which can increase the
employee work performance. Similarly, Cheng et al.
(2013) concluded that there were evidences of
moderating effects of age on the associations
between psychosocial work conditions and health.
Now the importance and the need of working
condition is so describing or defining the physical
environment by Employees having poor working
conditions will only provoke negative performance,
since their jobs are mentally and physically
demanding, they need good working conditions.
Appreciation
A study by Mahazril et al. (2012) organizations had
the duty to appreciate the employee from time to
time and offer other form of benefits such as
payment, which will help in employee motivation.
Likewise, Kingira and Mescib (2010) define
appreciation as the abstract of immaterial incentives;
‘‘employees giving immaterial incentives
(appreciation, respect etc.) as much as materiel
incentives with working department’’ shows
employees do not agree with this behavioural
statement. With this result, it can be stated that
employees being employed in different parts can
take their different opinions at different levels.
Vol 11, Issue 6,June/2020
ISSN NO:0377-9254
www.jespublication.com PageNo:1251
Among the variable of responsibility and being
appreciated, it is understood that ‘‘success of
employers always be appreciated with education.’’
The more effective quality and practicality of
education employees had, the more contribution
they will have to businesses.
Job security
As per Yamamoto (2013) if an employee perceives
they will be getting rewards for good work and their
job is a secured one, the performance will
automatically be better. Similarly, Zhang and Wu
(2004) indicated that with Job security, an employee
gets confident with the future career and they put
their most efforts to achieve the objectives of the
organization. So we can say job satisfaction is the
most influential tool of motivation and put the
employee very far off from mental tension and he
gives his best to the organization, ultimately it leads
to profit maximization.
Recognition
According to Candi et al. (2013), a growing
recognition of the opportunities of innovation is
through experience staging. Mahazril et al. (2012)
concluded that rewards and recognition and
communication may motivate them to work.
Recognition enhances the level of productivity and
performance at job whether it is a first time
performance or a repeated action at the job in a
progressive way and ultimately reinforces the
behaviour of employee.
Social opportunities
In (2013), Harvey indicated that an employee is
accepted as part of the social group or team. Most
staff has an acute need that their contribution is
worthwhile, appreciated, and acknowledged.
Organizations need to look beyond the traditional
economic incentives of career opportunities and
salaries to other social and lifestyle factors outside
the workplace. Similarly, Kingira and Mescib
(2010) concluded that, different opinions between
the employees in terms of behavioural statements
which can be ‘‘Social opportunities providing at the
highest level with working period leads the
employee to achieve their goals of the
organization.’’ Therefore, a social opportunity for
the employee is used to boost their motivation level
and ultimately helps in achieving the goals and
objectives of the organization.
Figure 1: Flow of motivation
Early career (20-40 Yrs) Middle Career (41-
54 Yrs

Training Monetary-incentives
Monetary-incentives Achievement
Job security Promotion
Recognition Appreciation
Appreciation Job satisfaction
Job transfer
 Late Career (55 Yrs & above)

 Achievement
 Recognition
 Opportunities
 Job satisfaction
Figure 1 explains how motivation works in
different stages of life, and motivation dimension
plays a vital role in enhancing individual
performance in different stages of life of human
being. In the developed and developing nations
around the world people experiencing the
phenomenon of population aging i.e., participation
of worker in their late career stage is low in the
labour market. Levinson’s (1986) life stage model
pointed out that adult life is characterized by a
consecution of stages, such as early, middle, and late
career stage, divided into various sub-stages and
concerned with career development (comparable to
the career stage model of Super (1984)). Here we
have considered early career stage between 20 and
40; middle career stages between 40 and 54, and late
career stage 55 and above.
In the early and middle stage of life, money is
important to goal setting because offering such
incentives bring person being more willing to
Vol 11, Issue 6,June/2020
ISSN NO:0377-9254
www.jespublication.com PageNo:1252
expand effort to meet a given goal level than not
offering the incentives. Given the willingness to
expand effort, a goal tells the individual during
different career stages where to expand effort, how
much effort to exert, and how long to exert the effort.
For example, younger employees early in their
careers may have a propensity for higher immediate
compensation and benefits, such as fully paid family
medical plans or maternity/paternity leaves; because
employees in later career stages might prefer stock
options or most company contributions to their
retirement plans. Wiley (1997) concluded that good
pay is an important motivator regardless of age.
Fig. 2 Theoretical construct of research
dimensions
Training
Monetary-incentives
Job transfer
Job satisfaction
Promotion
Achievement Motivation
Working condition
Appreciation Individual performance
Job security Individual Responsiveness
Recognition Group performance
Opportunities Group Responsiveness
 Organizational performance
Figure 2 explains how motivation dimensions
influence individual and organization performance.
In this competitive environment, organizations
works harder to integrate its workforce and to keep
the coordination among employees to enhance the
working as well as employee productivity. The
positive impact of motivation works toward
enhancing individual responsiveness toward work.
Individual enhanced responsiveness help
organization working that directly links toward
increase in profit and increase in organization
responsiveness. Customer will be more satisfied if
organization shows fast response toward his/her
queries and if organization takes responsibility to
fulfil his demand.
 If we talk the motivation dimension that
enhances organization performance, training used to
enhance the skills, efficiency, and knowledge of
employees for doing a particular job during their
earlier career stage because it familiarizes them with
the organizations goals, rules, and regulations and
the working conditions in one hand since updates
and amendments take place in technology,
purchasing a new equipment, changes in technique
of production, and computer impartment. The
employees are trained for use of new equipment’s
and work methods. Training moulds the thinking of
employees and leads to quality performance of
employees. Supervisors believe that older workers
are less motivated to learn, less flexible, and do not
want to take part in training programs. So,
companies do not invest in training or development
opportunities for older people. In turn, older workers
become less self-confident due to the lack of support
in terms of training and their skills rapidly become
out dated (Maurer 2001; Van Vianen et al. 2011).
 Giving a job security to an employee makes him
more responsible toward job. Job security can be
explained as, affirmation that an employee has for
the continuity of gainful employment for his or her
job. It is more essential for younger employee during
different career stages of life (job) because it arises
from the terms of contract of employment, labour
legislation that results in prevention of arbitrary
termination, layoffs, and lockout. Likewise, Pravin
and Kabir (2011) indicated that with job security in
pharmaceutical companies employee is ‘‘neither
happy nor unhappy’’ and hence influence job
satisfaction in pharmaceutical companies. Job
security has been considered from several
theoretical perspectives, including as a motivational
precursor to job performance.
 Employee recognition is used to fulfill the
inherent need to appreciate as well as work to be
validated by the employee contribution. During the
early and later stage of life of the employee, the most
important tool to motivate the employee by
recognizing positive behavior from employees
means that those desired behaviors that drive
business success will be reciprocated. Recognition is
essential to an outstanding workplace because
Vol 11, Issue 6,June/2020
ISSN NO:0377-9254
www.jespublication.com PageNo:1253
people want to be respected and valued for their
contribution. Recognizing employee for their good
work sends an extremely powerful message to the
recipient, their work team, and other employees
through formal and informal communication
channels. Employee recognition is a dynamic
communication technique to improve employee
performance which leads to enhance organizational
performance.
 In an organization, it is important to make the
employees valued and appreciated because of which
they get motivated and they work harder and be
more loyal toward the organization. During the early
and middle career stage of the job employee want
more appreciation from his next boss in the
organization. Many ways of appreciating employee
are news for companies looking for inexpensive
ways to show appreciation to employees who made
an appreciative effort, to thank employees several
times a week, often through notes mailed to their
homes and admits an employee-of-the-month
program, the least time-consuming way to make sure
his staff continued to appreciate.
 In an organization employees have the
opportunity to transfer to another job if they are
moving or have the want to switch occupations. It
brings positive energy among the early career stage
employee to work in a new environment, which
gives workers the opportunity to learn multiple skills
and outlooks. When employees continue working at
the same tasks for an extended time, they are likely
to build tight relationships with particular
individuals and companies, which can yield help to
the employees, and to the organization.
 In the early stage of the employee, they used to
seek the working environment and aspects of an
employee’s terms and conditions of employment.
This includes the employee payment, organization
of work, and work activities; training, skills, and
employability; amenities, physical environment,
health, safety, and well-being; and working time and
work–life balance. These used to motivate the
employee to do better and achieve the organizational
goals and objectives. Changes in working conditions
and other aspects of the employment relationship
can generate serious industrial relations problems.
 Williams et al. (2003) argues that the job
satisfaction works toward making good
relationships with staff and colleagues, control of
time off, enough resources, and bring autonomy for
employee in the organization. It is essential in the
stages of employment i.e., early, middle, and late
career stage of life because it brings any
combination of physiological, psychological,
satisfaction that invokes a person truthfully to say I
am satisfied with my current job and it leads to
employee motivation to achieve goals of the
organization. Job satisfaction refers doing a job one
enjoys, and being rewarded for one’s
accomplishment. It is the key ingredient that leads to
recognition, income, promotion, and the
achievement of other goals that lead to a feeling of
fulfillment of the desired goals and objectives
(Kaliski 2007).
 In the middle and late career stages of their
employment, employees have an opportunity to
showcase their achievements with pride. Employees
work in organizations not just to make a living, but
to make a life. It encourages heightened ownership
at work. Tangible benefits (salary) and intangible
benefits (achievements of the knowledge) and other
perks are necessary to engage employees, and
motivate them to do their personal best. Mehta et al.
(2000) pointed out that four most highly ranked
rewards for sales managers in the late career stage
have mean values that exceed 6.0, which includes
achievement of market goals, retaining respect of
salespeople, opportunities for promotion, and bonus.
 A motivated and dedicated employee in the
middle career stage of their job in the organization
is an asset for any organization and proves
instrumental in building a high-performance culture
that drives organizational advancement. Promotion
is always employee’s ultimate wish for the service
rendered by him in the organization and this is the
only way for an employee career development.
Promotion is the ultimate motivating for any
employee because it moves employee forward in
hierarchy of concern organization added with other
responsibility, higher respect, honours, with increase
in grade pay and allowances. It stimulates selfdevelopment and creates interest in the job in one
hand and minimizes discontent and unrest.
In the late career stage of their employment social
opportunities for employees to get involved in
leveraging the core competencies of the organization
to create business value and positive social change
can increase employee motivation and job
satisfaction and help workers to more effectively
Vol 11, Issue 6,June/2020
ISSN NO:0377-9254
www.jespublication.com PageNo:1254
manage job stress. This can lead to positive gains for
the organization by enhancing organizational
effectiveness and improving work quality, as well as
by helping the organization attract and keep top
quality employees, which can bring growth and
development to the organizations and can improve
the quality of their employees’ work experience and
realize the benefits of developing workers to their
full potential.
CONCLUSION
Motivation works as a catalyser for individual
employees working for an organization to enhance
their working performance or to complete task in
much better way than they usually do. In this paper,
authors identified the key motivation techniques
from existing literature and linked it through
organization performance. These motivation
techniques has long been acknowledged as an
important personnel work with the potential to
improve employee motivation and hence
performance, and to deliver management with the
control needed to achieve organizational objectives.
Authors made flow of motivation from early career
motivation techniques to late career motivation
techniques and reached on a conclusion: if
employees are provided with right motivation
technique at right time, their morale and confidence
goes up and had a direct positive impact in
individual performance and organizational
performance. It is indicative of the above discussion,
most of the motivation dimensions viz. training,
monetary incentives, promotion, and working
conditions has been met and for reason the efforts
made to motivate are bound to succeed. This
conclusion is built on the emphasis made by earlier
researchers to motivate people, organizations need
to first have the baseline in place; in the absence of
the baseline, motivation is not possible to achieve.
The study has shown success in intrinsic motivators
and extrinsic motivators to improve performance in
the organization.
LIMITATION
The major limitation of this study is that the
proposed framework is designed on basis of
extensive literature review and so needs to be
confirmed using quantitative measures. This
framework is not been implemented in specific
industry, due to its generality in nature. Although
extensive research is reviewed and every possible
dimensions of motivation are studied, it cannot be
stated explicitly that these dimensions will be able to
create the baseline which will motivate the
employees through the motivators. Thus, they create
a dilemma as to whether these motivation
dimensions are enough to create a solid baseline
which has an impact on the motivators.
REFERENCES
Kenneth W. Thomas (April 13, 2009) Intrinsic
Motivation at Work: What Really Drives Employee
Engagement 2nd Edition, Kindle Edition.
Judy Cameron, W. David Pierce. Bergin & Garvey
(2002) Rewards and Intrinsic Motivation: Resolving
the Controversy.
Doug Jensen, Tom McMullen, Mel Stark. American
Management Association (2007) The Manager's
Guide to Rewards: What You Need to Know to Get
the Best For--And From--Your Employees.
John Eric Adair; Neil Thomas Thorogood (2004).
The Concise Adair on Teambuilding and Motivation.
Basford, Tessa E.; Offermann, Lynn R. Journal of
Management and Organization, (November 2012).
Beyond Leadership: The Impact of Coworker
Relationships on Employee Motivation and Intent to
Stay.
Richmond, F. Lynn; Schepman, StephenJournal of
Organizational Culture, Communications and
Conflict, July 2005.Fifty Years of Employee
Motivation Surveys: Three from the Final Half of the
Twentieth Century.
Carleton, Karen International Journal of
Management, (June 2011).How to Motivate and
Retain Knowledge Workers in Organizations: A
Review of the Literature.
Ashmos, D. P., & Duchon, D. (2000). Spirituality at
work: A conceptualization and measure. Journal of
Management Inquiry.
Azizi, N., & Liang, M. (2013). An integrated
approach to worker assignment, workforce
flexibility acquisition, and task rotation. Journal of
the Operational Research Society.
Barton, L. C., & Ambrosini, V. (2013). The
moderating effect of organizational change cynicism
on middle manager strategy commitment.
International Journal of Human Resource
Management.
Vol 11, Issue 6,June/2020
ISSN NO:0377-9254
www.jespublication.com PageNo:1255
Casad, S. (2012). Implications of job rotation
literature for performance improvement
practitioners. Performance Improvement Quarterly.
Cheng, A., & Brown, A. (1998). HRM strategies and
labor turnover in the hotel industry: A comparative
study of Australia and Singapore. International
journal of human resource management.
Chenhall, R. H. (2005). Integrative strategic
performance measurement systems, strategic
alignment of manufacturing, learning and strategic
outcomes: An exploratory study. Accounting,
Organizations and Society.
Chiaburu, D. S., & Tekleab, A. G. (2005). Individual
and contextual influences on multiple dimensions of
training effectiveness. Journal of European
Industrial Training.
Clark, C. S., Dobbins, G. H., & Ladd, R. T. (1993).
Exploratory field study of training motivation:
Influence of involvement, credibility, and transfer
climate. Group Organization Management.
Colquitt, J. A., LePine, J. A., & Noe, R. A. (2000).
Toward an integrative theory of training motivation:
A meta-analytic path analysis of 20 years of
research. Journal of Applied Psychology.
Den, H. D. N., & Verburg, R. M. (2004). High
performance work systems, organizational culture
and firm performance. Human Resource
Management Journal.
Garcı´a, I. A. L., Moscoso, S., & Ramos, V. P. J.
(2012). Reactions to the Fairness of Promotion
Methods: Procedural justice and job satisfaction.
International Journal of Selection and Assessment.
Swift, P. E., & Hwang, A. (2013). The impact of
affective and cognitive trust on knowledge sharing
and organizational learning. Learning Organization.
Wiley, C. (1997). What motivates employees
according to over 40 years of motivation surveys.
International Journal of Manpower.
Williams, H. (2013). Achieving supply chain utopia:
Companies need to priorities investing in people.
Development and Learning in Organizations.
Williams, E. S., Konrad, T. R., Linzer, M.,
McMurray, J., Pathman, D. E., Gerrity, M., et al.
(2003). Refining the measurement of physician job
satisfaction: Results from the physician work life
survey.