Pech, Richard & Slade, Bret. (2006). Employee disengagement: is there evidence of a growing problem?. Handbook of Business Strategy. 7. 21-25. 10.1108/10775730610618585. 

Employee disengagement: is thereevidence of a growing problem?



Lengthy episodes of distraction, rapid task saturation, a slow tempo of activity, poordecision making, too many days away from work, and lack of interest in work aresymptoms displayed by individuals who do not engage in the organizational context.They have become disengaged ± if they were ever engaged at all. In these examples,the employee's productive output is minimal.Organizations will often ``carry'' a few disengaged individuals, but what if the numberof employees who are disengaged increases? What if the entire organizationbecomes disengaged?Huckerby (2002) discusses ®ndings from the UK suggesting that only 17 percent ofemployees are truly ``engaged'' in their organizations, while 63 percent are ``notengaged'', and 20 percent are ``disengaged'' ± those who have mentally quit but stay on.Are these ®gures representative of poorly conceived ``guestimates'' or are they anaccurate representation of employee behaviors? If the latter, a colossal 83 percent ofemployees are on the job drawing salaries and bene®ts, while their energy isunavailable to the organization.According to Hochchild (1983), disengaged employees uncouple themselves fromwork roles and withdraw cognitively and emotionally. Kahn (1990, p. 694) describedengagement as the ``harnessing of organizational members'' selves to their workroles; in engagement, people employ and express themselves physically, cognitively,and emotionally during role performance.Tasker (2004, p. 8) de®nes engagement as a bene®cial two-way relationship whereemployees and employers ``go the extra mile'' for one another. According to Tasker,research conducted via the Personnel Today web site involving 400 HRprofessionals, one in four organizations admitted that staff were not engaged, thatthe situation was worsening, and 44 percent said that tackling the issue ofengagement was an ``overwhelming challenge''.Survey revealed less than half are taking actionWhere levels had fallen, the survey revealed that only 48 percent of ®rms were doingsomething about it. In direct contrast to these ®ndings, Tasker states that 69 percentof Board Directors believed that engagement levels in their organizations had|HANDBOOK OF BUSINESS STRATEGY|2006, pp. 21-25, # Emerald Group Publishing Limited, ISSN 0894-4318, DOI 10.1108/10775730610618585 PAGE 21
increased in the last twelve months. Their views appear in starkcontrast with those of their HR managers, of whom only 38percent seemed to agree. Someone is not communicating thebad news to the Board.Parr, (1996) cites research that suggests that poor employeework ethics will be the greatest near-term obstacle to thesuccess of US manufacturers, with declining trends inperformance on the increase, and management doing little toreduce the slide into stagnation. Clearly this is not just aproblem isolated to the USA.Beech and Anderson (2003) explain that engagement levelsmay be low due to poor levels of trust between employees andemployers, with only 39 percent of employees trusting whattheir business leaders were telling them. Luthans and Peterson(2002) claim that a correlation exists between levels ofemployee engagement and their manager's degree of self-ef®cacy, perhaps suggesting that a growing crisis existsbetween management and their subordinates.We do not have to reach all that far back into history to see thatthe problems of disengagement, individuals working to self-assigned output norms, ineffective supervisory styles, andformation of group productivity norms far below those set bythe organization were rampant in the days of Taylor, and laterMayo. Taylor's early 1900s notion of soldiering, where lowproductivity norms were set by workers, was one that he foundsimple to explain and impossible to defeat without theintroduction of precise output measurements (Wren, 2005).Productivity declines without interventionHail the birth of scienti®c management, the earliest of themodern era's attempts to win the war against employeedisengagement. Some two decades later, in his analysis of theHawthorne data, Mayo identi®ed that worker productivitycontinued to decline in the work setting unless internal andexternal interventions were brought to bear on the workforce. Inthis scenario external experiments conducted on workeractivity, encouraging improved supervisory styles, and workerinvolvement in decision processes, brought an exponential risein productivity (Wren, 2005).Not all interventions leading to a rise in productivity have beenpleasant. Slade (1994) noted that with large-scale workerterminations and workforce redundancies, productivityimprovements were short-term and initially both signi®cantand exponential, alluding to the symptoms of what is nowknown in common human resource management parlance asthe ``Survivor syndrome''.Treating employee disengagementThe con¯icting ®gures and perceptions reported on the issue ofworker disengagement suggest that the subject area has notbeen systematically researched. It also indicates that themeans for measuring engagement and disengagement needsurgent re®nement in order to produce standardized methodsand accurate scales of measurement.Although the exact statistics on worker disengagement appeardif®cult to con®rm from the con¯icting and sometimesanecdotal evidence, what is apparent is that large numbersof employees are not engaged or are completely disengaged. Itis also apparent that there is an increasing trend ofdisengagement developing in our workforce. Regardless ofthe exact numbers, the problem has reached the level thatmanagers are taking note and stating their concerns. However,according to Tasker (2004) 52 percent of ®rms admit that theyare doing little to combat this phenomenon. Thesediscouraging performance patterns appear to be on the rise.Managers, although aware of the problem, seem unwilling orunable to do anything about it. Why is such an important issuebeing ignored?Research by May et al. (2004), following in the footsteps ofKahn (1990), has demonstrated that the three psychologicalconditions of meaningfulness, safety, and availability exhibitedpositive relations with engagement. Meaningfulness displayedthe strongest relation.May et al. (2004) de®ne psychological meaningfulness as ``thevalue of a work goal or purpose, judged in relation to anindividual's own ideals or standards''. The authors use Khan's(1990) de®nition for psychological safety as ``feeling able toshow and employ one's self without fear of negativeconsequences to self-image, status, or career''. Finally, theauthors refer to Khan's (1990) de®nition of psychologicalavailability, an individual's belief that he/she has the physical,emotional or cognitive resources to engage the self at work.While this theoretical framework builds on existing knowledgeand is useful for highlighting the areas of most concern toemployees, May et al.'s (2004) research appears to stop shortof providing an explanation for the increasing number of reportsof disengagement in the workplace.Psychological condition of meaningfulnessA useful ®rst step for investigating the problem ofdisengagement may be to delve further into thepsychological condition of meaningfulness, since, accordingto May et al. (2004), this condition displays strong relations withengagement. Although May et al. did not relate the concept oforganizational identi®cation with the condition ofmeaningfulness, it can be argued that the former may be astrong determinant of the latter. Pratt (1998) and Van Dick et al.(2004, p. 173) argue that identi®cation with groups andorganizations can:... satisfy an individual's holistic need, since organizations providemeaning, and help the individual to ®nd a sense in his or her life ...identi®cation can be seen as concerning the employee as aPAGE 22|HANDBOOK OF BUSINESS STRATEGY|2006
person as a whole and affecting his or her cognitions, emotions,and behaviours.A common and recurring theme between engagement,meaningfulness, and identi®cation can be found in theelements of employee cognitions, emotions, and behaviors.Figure 1 describes the impact of the psychological conditionsof identi®cation and meaningfulness. It should be pointed outthat identi®cation and meaningfulness are not the soledeterminants of employee disengagement. Figure 1 ¯owsdown from the conditions of identi®cation and meaningfulness.Negative or low levels in these conditions will be causal factorsresulting in disengagement, factors that many managers andresearchers appear to be neglecting.Instead, their intervention strategies appear to be designed toaddress the symptoms shown at the bottom of the diagram.This can be demonstrated with a relatively quick and crudeanalysis of the ABI/INFORM ProQuest database.On April 28, 2005, a search for research related todisengagement determinants such as the psychologicalconditions of identi®cation and/or meaningfulness brought upthree and 55 publications respectively. Compare this with thenumber of publications on disengagement-related symptoms.Research in areas such as absenteeism brought up 405publications, quality ± related to the reduction of mistakes(50,706 publications), cynicism (155 publications), jobsatisfaction ± and related issues of dissatisfaction (3,179publications), and ®nally performance measurement (1,494publications). Performance measurement attracts a great dealof attention from researchers as well as managers, whichseems ironic.Focus remains on symptoms, not root causesIt appears that more effort is being expended in the pursuit ofmeasurement and analysis of symptomatic factors rolling out ofa state of disengagement than is expended in the pursuit ofemployee disengagement's causal or determining factors. Littlewonder that more than 50 percent of managers respond in thenegative when questioned about their strategies for dealingwith disengaged workers. Their focus is on symptoms andproductivity measurement techniques, not on employeedisengagement and its causes and cures. In some ways ourknowledge of the workforce and employee behavior has notprogressed all that far from the days of Taylor and Mayo.Disengagement ... and re-engagement at XeroxThe research on employee behavior tends to suggest thatidenti®cation and meaningfulness both have an impact on thedegree of engagement that a person is willing to provide. Therehas also been some mention of the impact of trust between anemployee and his or her supervisor or manager. It may beargued that a disengaged employee is still able to contribute,particularly if employed to perform repetitive tasks requiring littlecognitive involvement. However, if employees at the strategiclevel of the ®rm become disengaged, the impact can bedebilitating.Consider the example of Xerox. Xerox seemed to be on theropes in 2000, with US$17.1 billion in debt and US$154 millionin cash and capable staff seemingly applying the motto ``a goodemployee always has somewhere else to go'', by goingsomewhere else. Remaining Xerox staff displayed all thesymptoms of disengagement until the appointment of a newCEO. Fortune termed Anne Mulcahy, Xerox's new CEO as the``accidental CEO'' (Morris, 2003). According to Morris, Mulcahylaboured stubbornly in the face of advice claiming bankruptcyas the only solution to Xerox's problems.In relative terms Mulcahy's reconstruction of Xerox has beenrapid, yet she had little strategic input while the organizationwas struggling through its dif®culties four years previously.Mulcahy had been a Xerox employee for 24 years before ®ndingFigure 1 Determinants for the incubation of employeedisengagement through lack of psychologicalidentification or meaningfulness|HANDBOOK OF BUSINESS STRATEGY|2006 PAGE 23
herself in the top position, yet she was unable to add signi®cantvalue to the company until she was placed in the CEO'sposition, from where she was then able to turn the businessaround in a few short years. Morris (2003) quotes a Xeroxemployee talking about Mulcahy, ``Her willingness to workshoulder to shoulder with subordinates gives her unusualcredibility and the ability to galvanize the team.''Increasing psychological conditions of identi®cationMulcahy's leadership behavior stopped the phenomenon ofemployee disengagement in its tracks. She increased thepsychological conditions of identi®cation and meaning forXerox's employees, ®rstly by demonstrating her ownwillingness and ability to pour herself into the organizationaleffort, and secondly, by equipping and empowering others todo the same. This was not merely paying lip service tomanagement jargon. Mulcahy's leadership style created trustbetween top management and Xerox's employees. Once trusthad been restored in the organization, the emotions of prideand determination motivated employees to engage with the®rm.Taylor noted the same effective correlation between pride andperformance in the early 1900s (Wren, 2005), yet it appearsthat managers must still ``rediscover'' this principle forthemselves ± and many have simply not learned it at all.Such trust was apparently absent between her predecessorThoman and Xerox employees.When Richard Thoman was appointed as CEO of Xerox in1999, Wall Street was excited about his massive reorganizationof the company. But according to Kahn and Schlosser (2000)this view was not shared from inside the organization. Theauthors claim that Thoman was despised for his highhandedmanner and his lack of leadership skills. Employees did nottrust their newly appointed CEO and Xerox suffered as aconsequence.Employees respond to an environment in which there is mutualtrust. Perry and Mankin (2004) contend that managerialexpertise should relate positively to trust; therefore amanager's credibility forms a crucial component oftrustworthiness. They also identi®ed the importance ofemployee perceptions and how this in¯uences trust. Theyclaim that employee perception of management turnoverindicates leadership instability. This perception wouldintroduce an element of insecurity for employees, whichwould in turn negatively affect identi®cation andmeaningfulness of work.ConclusionThere is suf®cient evidence to suggest that employeedisengagement is on the rise, and it is also apparent thatlarge numbers of managers are uncertain of causes orinterventions needed to re-engage the employee with the ®rm.The cause of disengagement has not yet been adequatelyidenti®ed, although a number of potential catalysts have beendiscussed. Some of these catalysts are shown in the table inFigure 2. It may be possible that some forms of disengagementcan be attributed to the external environment, perhaps theemployee feels a sense of instability or insecurity emanatingfrom government, unions, the neighbourhood, or shareholders.Psychological factors may include declining levels of trustbetween management and subordinates.It could be speculated that such declining trust may result fromchanges in the work environment such as contractual changesof employment or management turnover. Such changes mayreduce worker identi®cation with their employing organization.They may include increasing demands for cognitive rather thanphysical input as organizations move from doing to knowing.They may include a declining sense of work meaningfulness inan increasingly complex living environment. They could be theresult of cynicism about equity in pay and performance,frustrated ambitions, disinterest in the job, or any number ofother psychological issues. Further research into the causes ofdisengagement will provide a better basis for identifying a cureor range of interventions.It is possible that one individual in a position of power andin¯uence with leadership qualities can excise a state ofdisengagement and stimulate and focus employee energy.Similarly, one individual with power and in¯uence but who isFigure 2 Potential sources/causes of employee disengagementPAGE 24|HANDBOOK OF BUSINESS STRATEGY|2006
lacking in leadership ability may be responsible for creating aclimate of disengagement and thereby deplete the organizationof its energy. In the latter case, employees may decide toremain with their organization but their hearts and minds havedisengaged from the task. Again, further research shouldidentify what these leadership or management de®cits may be.Policies and procedures cultivate disengagementOrganizational structures, traditions, rules, policies, conditions,and procedures may also cultivate disengagement. Withincreasing levels of education and global awareness,employees are perhaps venting their frustrations bywithholding commitment and energy. A ponderousbureaucracy, lack of resourcing, low standards andacceptance of poor performance may all contribute toemployee disengagement (Pech, 2001).Many of the above causes may suggest that the fault fordisengagement always lies with the ®rm or its managers; this isnot always the case. The employee may be responsible for theinitial problem that has switched him of her off, but theorganization is also responsible as it must then manage thesituation. Whether this calls for counselling, training,retrenchment, demotion, or negotiation, managers mustconfront such problems before they become embeddedwithin the ®rm's culture.Current conditions create climate for trust, innovationGlobalisation, speed, and ambiguity on the business landscapedemand the highest levels of ®tness to facilitate organizationalsurvival. In such volatile environments, competitors with theright combinations of economic outputs, trust, innovation, andleadership have the greatest prospects for survival. Noorganization can afford to underutilize its employee energy. Itis argued that employee engagement is a critical ®eld for furtherresearch.JReferencesBeech, R. and Anderson, B. (2003), ``Corporate America: the role of HRin re-engaging restless employees'', Bene®ts & CompensationInternational, Vol. 33 No. 5, p. 14. Hochchild, A.R. (1983), The Managed Heart. Commercialization ofHuman Feeling, University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.Huckerby, L. (2002), ``Recruitment and retention strategies for acomplex workforce'', Insight: Shaping the Future of Business, Vol. 16,Deloitte Touche, New Zealand, p. 12. Kahn, J. and Schlosser, J. (2000), ``The paper jam from hell'', Fortune,Vol. 142 No. 11, p. 142. Kahn, W.A. (1990), ``Psychological conditions of personal engagementand disengagement at work'', Academy of Management Journal,Vol. 33, pp. 692-724. Luthans, F. and Peterson, S.J. (2002), ``Employee engagement andmanager self-ef®cacy: implications for managerial effectiveness anddevelopment'', The Journal of Management Development, Vol. 21No. 5/6, pp. 376-87. May, D.R., Gilson, R.L. and Harter, L.M. (2004), ``The psychologicalconditions of meaningfulness, safety and availability and theengagement of the human spirit at work'', Journal of Occupationaland Organizational Psychology, Vol. 77 Part 1, pp. 11-37. Morris, B. (2003), ``The accidental CEO'', Fortune, Vol. 147 No. 13,June, p. 58. Parr, G.L. (1996), ``Message received but not heard'', Quality, Vol. 35No. 5, p. 4. Pech, R.J. (2001), ``Termites, group behaviour and the loss ofinnovation: conformity rules!'', Journal of Managerial Psychology,Vol. 16 No. 7, November, pp. 559-74. Perry, R.W. and Mankin, L.D. (2004), ``Understanding employee trust inmanagement: conceptual clari®cation and correlates'', PublicPersonnel Management, Vol. 33 No. 3, Fall, pp. 277-91. Pratt, M.G. (1998), ``To be or not to be? Cental questions inorganizational identi®cation'', in Whetton, D.A. and Godfrey, P.C.(Eds), Identity in Organizations: Building Theory through Conversations,Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 171-207. Slade B. (1994), ``A discussion of Australia's ®rst large-scaleoutplacement exercise for blue- and white-collar workers'', Master'sthesis, La Trobe University, Melbourne.Tasker, J. (2004), ``Engagement equals productivity'', Personnel Today,October 5, pp. 8-9. Van Dick, R., Wagner, U., Stellmacher, J. and Christ, O. (2004),``The utility of a broader conceptualization of organizationalidenti®cation: which aspects really matter?'', Journal of Occupationaland Organizational Psychology, Vol. 77, June, pp. 171-91. Wren, D. (2005), History of Management Thought, 5th ed., Wiley,Hoboken, NJ.