Conners, M. (2020). Employee Engagement Literature Review. https://shareok.org/bitstream/handle/11244/329417/oksd_conners_HT_2020.pdf?sequence=1




Employee Engagement Literature Review
Oklahoma State University
Spears School of Business Honors Thesis
BHON-4990-31542
Author: Maggie Conners
First Reader: Lindsey Greco, Ph.D. | Department of Management
Second Reader: Evan Davis, Ph.D. | Assistant Dean
Conners, 1
Abstract
The aim of this thesis is to utilize employee engagement research to conduct a literature
review of employee engagement, and create an engagement plan for managers at BOK Financial.
Creating the engagement plan will help managers at BOK Financial better engage their
employees, while becoming more engaged themselves. Researching engagement prior to creating
the engagement plan helped identify potential resources and modules to utilize in the plan. This
review provided clarity on the meaning of employee engagement, measuring employee
engagement, and how managers can apply this research to their employees. This initial literature
review will help articulate the contrasting definitions, models, antecedents, and outcomes of
employee engagement. Lastly, I follow up the research and training plan with a brief summary of
the project details and my future with employee engagement.
Defining Engagement
Within my research, I discovered various similar definitions for engagement. The first
was William Kahn’s 1990 definition: “the harnessing of an employee’s full self in terms of
physical, cognitive, and emotional energies to work role performances.” This definition was
referenced by (Bailey, Madden, Alfes, & Fletcher, 2017; Kinicki & Fugate, 2018; Rich, Lepine,
& Crawford., 2010; Saks, 2006) and breaks down into the three energy components: cognitive,
physical, and affective (emotional).
The cognitive energy component can be allocated into either professional or personal
areas of life; on the professional side, job involvement provides an excellent example. According
to Bruce Rich, “job involvement refers to the degree to which employees relate to their jobs as
comprising their lives in total.” An engaged employee will relate strongly to the job, and often
think about work outside of the office. The next component is the affective energy component,
Conners, 2
which looks at the emotional reactions to our desire to fulfill needs and values. In a work-related
sense, we can take this to mean job satisfaction. Angelo Kinicki and Mel Fugate define job
satisfaction as, “an affective or emotional response towards various facets of your job” (Kinicki
& Fugate 2018), which boils down to how emotionally connected the employee feels to his or
her job; if an employee is very emotionally tied to the job, he or she will be more engaged. The
last component is the physical energy component. This is how much effort an employee exerts
into his or her job, often measured by intrinsic motivation. The definition of intrinsic motivation
is, “the desire to exert effort on a task in the absence of external constraints or contingencies”
(Rich et al., 2010). When an employee puts a lot of effort into the work without prompting, that
employee is more engaged.
When taken alone, these components mean little. By putting all three components
together, we easily see that if an employee is cognitively invested with the job, is happy to be
working there, and puts lots of energy into his or her work, then that employee would be very
engaged. The engagement comes from a common investment of the various energies and
maintaining it over time. When an employee is engaged, he or she will be fully invested in the
work, which will lead him or her to better performance and success. Overall, Kahn sees these
three components as the, “hands, head, and heart into active full work performance” (Rich et al.,
2010).
The Oldenburg Burnout Inventory explains the next version of employee engagement,
created by Wilmar Schaufeli, as “a positive, fulfilling, work-related state of mind that is
characterized by vigor, dedication, and absorption” (Bakker & Demerouti, 2008). This definition
was referenced by (Bakker & Demerouti, 2008; González-Romá, Schaufeli, Bakker, & Lloret,
2006; Crawford, Lepine, & Rich, 2010; Bailey et al., 2017, Bakker, Albrecht, & Leiter, 2011)
Conners, 3
This definition, like the Kahn definition, is also broken up into three components: vigor,
dedication, and absorption. According to Vicente Gozalez-Roma, the vigor component means,
“high levels of energy and mental resilience while working or willingness to invest effort in
work.” The dedication component means “a sense of significance, enthusiasm, inspiration, pride
and challenge.” Lastly, the absorption component means, “fully concentrating on and being
deeply engross in one’s work.” However, vigor and dedication are referenced most often
(Gonzalez-Roma et al., 2006).
Often, this definition is used to explain the opposite of employee engagement—
burnout—meaning, “a reaction to a chronic occupational stress characterized by emotional
exhaustion, cynicism, and lack of professional efficacy.” In this sense, vigor is the opposite of
exhaustion and dedication is the opposite of cynicism, drawing the conclusion that burnout and
engagement are opposites.
Arnold Bakker and Evangelia Demerouti provide a great explanation to the difference
between engagement and burnout. A burned out employee and an engaged employee may both
feel tired at the end of a long work day, but the engaged employee will feel tired with a sense of
completion, success, and reward, whereas the burned out employee will feel tired with a sense of
defeat, frustration, and emptiness (Bakker & Demerouti, 2008).
Bailey outlines other definitions that scholars in the field have created. For example,
some think of engagement as a management practice, meaning that employers are viewing
engagement as, “doing engagement” vs “being engaged.” This changes the paradigm from
employees engaging themselves to employers engaging their employees. The other definition
thinks about engagement as a reciprocity agreement (Bailey et al., 2017). This paper will discuss
the idea more, but some researchers believe that engagement stems partially due to a feeling of
Conners, 4
obligation towards employers. If the employer provides good opportunities and cares about the
employee, then that employee will attempt to repay their manager by investing more fully in the
work.
Although the definitions by Kahn and Schaufeli present engagement in slightly different
lights, they are very similar. First, both definitions focus on how perceived work conditions (job
resources and demands, and organizational support) predict employee engagement level. Second,
when compared directly, each of the three components have a synonym in the other definition:
the physical, affective, and cognitive components from Kahn’s definition match respectively
with vigor, dedication, and absorption from Schaufeli’s definition. A vigorous employee will
show high mental resilience and work with a lot of energy and effort, which is very physical. A
dedicated employee feels a sense of significance about the job, and the affective component is all
about fulfilling emotional needs at work. An absorbed employee is fully concentrating on the
work and thinks very deeply about it, which shows cognitive energy (Bailey et al., 2017). At the
end of the day, engagement focuses around creating a positive work experience for employees,
so they can give their biggest and best effort towards the employer.
Models
The most common model explaining employee engagement is the Job DemandsResources model. This model explains that job resources feed an employee’s engagement,
whereas job demands detract from an employee’s engagement. Formally defined, job resources
are, “aspects of the job that are functional in achieving work goals, stimulate personal growth
and development, and reduce job demands and their associated physiological costs” (Crawford et
al., 2010). These are things like social support, performance feedback, skill variety, autonomy,
and learning opportunities. Furthermore, job resources, “fulfill basic human needs, such as the
Conners, 5
needs for autonomy, relatedness and competence” (Bakker & Demerouti, 2008). Yet, not only
are job resources important for engagement, but also personal resources. Bakker and Demerouti
define personal resources as, “positive self-evaluations that are linked to resiliency and refer to
individuals’ sense of their ability to control and impact upon their environment successfully.” In
many studies, it was found that the more personal resources someone had, the more engaged he
or she was at work. They believe that having this high self-regard creates a positive selfevaluation within employees, so employees feel more confident in their ability to control and
impact their environment, and can create goals that better align with their personality (Bakker &
Demerouti, 2008).
Job demands, on the other hand, decrease employee engagement. According to Eean
Crawford, job demands are, “physical, social, or organizational aspects of the job that require
sustained physical or mental effort and are therefore associated with certain psychological costs”
(Crawford et al., 2010). Job demands require an employee to exert lots of effort to meet a
specific goal; sustaining this effort overtime causes the employee to feel exhausted and stressed.
Bakker and Demerouti show that individuals stress because of the potential for losing resources,
which happens during periods of high job demands, and can quickly lead to burnout. Thus, to
prevent stress, an individual will need more resources to balance out the lost resources during
high demand times. If an individual already has many resources, he or she faces reduced stress
even in times of high job demands (Bakker & Demerouti, 2008).
However, many researchers have found that job demands are actually terrible predictors
of job engagement. For example, in one study, job demands like emotional dissonance and
organizational changes negatively related to engagement, but other demands like high workload
Conners, 6
positively related to engagement. Crawford aims to clarify this discrepancy through
differentiating the types of job demands in the “Differentiated Job Demands-Resources Model.”
They call the first category of job demands “challenge stressors”, which are stressful, but
also support things like mastery, personal growth, and future success; some examples include
high workload, time pressures, and high job responsibility (Crawford et al., 2010). Therefore,
challenge stressors positively relate to engagement because they fulfill basic needs in the
employee. They call the second category “hindrance stressors”, which are stressful demands that
tend to impeded on personal growth and reaching goals. Employees see these demands as
roadblocks to what they really want to accomplish, so they are inherently disengaging.
Another popular model in explaining employee engagement is Social Exchange Theory,
where, “obligations are generated through a series of interactions between parties who are in a
state of reciprocal interdependence” (Saks, 2006). When applied to engagement, employees
engage because they feel obligated to do so. This is because overtime, a relationship builds
between the employee and either co-workers or supervisors through reciprocal exchanges; when
one party performs an action or service, it is then expected that the other party will repay that
service. We can then conclude that if a supervisor provides resources for employee success, that
employee will exert more physical, cognitive, and emotional energy in response.
Antecedents
Engaging employees is going to look different for every person and organization, but
there are some common methods. First, there are personal factors within the employees
themselves that will make them more engaged, and organizations should try to hire employees
who match these traits. One of these personal factors is psychological capital, which is defined
as, “a state of development characterized by having confidence to take on and put necessary
Conners, 7
effort, making a positive attribution about succeeding now and in the future, preserving towards
goals, and redirecting paths to goals in order to succeed” (Bakker et al., 2011). This means that
an individual who has strong self-efficacy, optimism, hope, perseverance and resilience will
naturally be more engaged at work. Having a strong core self-evaluation falls in this same idea.
Bakker explains that Kahn believes, “Individuals with high core self-evaluations appraise
demands more positively, have greater ability to cope with these demands effectively, and thus
have more resources available to invest in the performance (Bakker et al., 2011).
Another personal factor is psychological availability. Rich says individuals who are more
psychologically available are ready to put in more physical, cognitive, and emotional energy into
their role. Psychologically available individuals will have high self-confidence, status, and selfconsciousness (Rich et al., 2010). With a higher perceived ability to be successful in a task, the
employee will be able to exert more energy towards it, and therefore become more engaged.
If personal factors alone caused higher engagement, then employers would not waste
resources trying to increase engagement. The next part of engagement occurs from situational
factors at work: job characteristics, organizational support/climate, rewards and recognition, and
justice. Job characteristics, according to the Kinicki and Fugate, promote intrinsic motivation
through designing jobs that have skill variety, task identity, task significance, autonomy, and
feedback (Kinicki & Fugate, 2018). Job characteristics promote engagement when employees
use many of their talents, can see how their part plays in the bigger picture, perceive meaning in
the work, feel they are in control, and receive timely feedback on their work.
Arguably, the most important situational factor for engagement is the climate for
organizational support at the company. Perceived organizational support and perceived
supervisor support are the main drivers of organizational support; defined, these are when the
Conners, 8
employee believes that the organization and supervisor values his or her contributions and cares
about him or her as a person. Saks explains that perceived organizational and supervisor support
make employees feel safe enough at work that they can fail without fearing the consequences
(Saks, 2006). This type of environment allows employees to feel comfortable exerting energy
into the organization, which engages them. It is important to note that organizational support is
one of the job resources from the Job Demands-Resources model, the fundamental cause of the
Social Exchange Theory (employees feel obligated to engage at work when their
supervisor/organization supports them and provides resources) and will come up again in another
antecedent to employee engagement.
The next situational factor causing employee engagement stems from rewards and
recognition. Saks explains that employees feel they have a stronger return on investment from
their engagement when they receive rewards and recognition for meaningful work. A lack of
rewards and recognition can also lead to burnout (Saks, 2006). This goes back to the Social
Exchange Theory; an employee will feel obligated to engage when the organization provides him
or her with rewards and recognition.
The last situational factor of employee engagement is justice, defined in both procedural
and distributive justice. Procedural justice is fairness in the process for determining outcomes
and consequences, and distributive justice is fairness in who receives how much of the
consequence or outcome. It is very important than an organization treats the employees fairly
and consistently, enough that the employees can predict what the reward or punishment will be
for a certain outcome (Saks, 2006). When employees feel fair treatment at work, they will be
more willing to exert energy and engage at work; they will also return the favor of justice by
acting fairly in their work through higher levels of engagement.
Conners, 9
The final antecedent to employee engagement is the idea that three psychological
conditions need to be present in order for the employee to engage. According to Rich, Kahn
believes when an employee is deciding to engage, he or she will think about the organization and
tasks in terms of meaningfulness, safety, and availability. Meaningfulness relates to value
congruence with the work; when the employee’s values line up with the work, the work will
seem worthwhile, valuable, and useful, which will help that employee engage. (Rich et al.,
2010).
The safety component is really looking at the psychological safety within the
organization. Rich defines psychological safety as, “feeling able to invest oneself without fear or
negative consequences.” As mentioned earlier, when an employee perceives more support from
the organization and supervisor, he or she feels comfortable failing, can invest him or herself
fully, and therefore becomes more engaged. The author goes on to explain, “employees who
perceive high organizational support have positive and secure expectations concerning the
organizational likely reactions… and thus they have less reason to fear incurring damaging
consequences as a result of investing themselves fully” (Rich et al., 2010).
The last component within the three psychological conditions is psychological
availability, defined as, “individuals’ readiness to personally engage at a particular moment”
(Saks, 2006). Employees who are more available are prepared to exert more physical, cognitive
and emotional energy into their roles. This availability stems from the earlier mentioned core
self-evaluations: the more confidence and self-efficacy the employee has, the more energy that
person can exert into the roles, and will therefore be more engaged.
Outcomes
Conners, 10
Why focus on employee engagement in the first place? When employees are more
engaged in their work, they tend to do a better job overall. According to Gallup, “engaged
employees achieve 12 percent higher customer satisfaction, 18 percent more productivity, and 12
percent great profitability” (Kinicki & Fugate, 2018). In many articles, there is no defined
relationship between engagement and job performance, but many studies and researchers have
supported a positive relationship. Bakker and Demerouti state that engaged employees received
higher ratings from co-workers on in-role and extra-role performance than their non-engaged
counterparts did (Bakker & Demerouti, 2008). As we have learned so far, engagement is about
maintaining and applying physical, cognitive and emotional energy to a work role. According to
Rich, investing physical energy into a work role facilitates organizationally valued behaviors at a
higher effort over time. Investing cognitive energy allows the employee to focus more on tasks,
and when people pay closer attention, they make fewer mistakes. Investments of emotional
energy foster a better connection among co-workers towards organizational goals, and help the
employee genuinely meet the emotional demands of the work (Rich et al., 2010). Overall,
employees who are engaged in their work dedicate more energy at a greater intensity for longer
periods, pay more attention to their work, and feel emotionally passionate about their work,
which likely improves job performance.
Not only does this show that employees perform better when engaged, but they are also
willing to go further than their formal duties through organizational citizenship behaviors (OCB).
OCB are actions by the employee that go above-and-beyond formal job duties to help the
organization. Although not directly related to performing a task, these behaviors make working
for the organization a little bit better. According to Rich, the more engaged employees are, “they
Conners, 11
should be more willing to step outside the bounds of their formally defined jobs and engage in
acts that constitute OCB” (Rich et al., 2010).
Lastly, engaged employees enhance the engagement of other employees through a
process coined, “engagement contagion.” Bakker and Demerouti define this as, “the transfer of
positive or negative experiences from one person to the other.” The authors goes on to explain
that, controlling for demands and resources, engaged workers showed lots of optimism and
positive affects towards coworkers, which created a positive group feeling and allowed everyone
to work better as a team (Bakker & Demerouti, 2008). Bakker found that the mood of the leader
rubbed off on the individual team members, so when a leader was in a good mood, the team
members were happy as well, which allowed them to cooperate better. (Bakker et al., 2011).
Engaged employees have better attitude towards their work and experience positive emotions.
These emotions then influence those of their colleagues, which makes everyone more engaged.
This then increases both performance and organizational citizenship behaviors across the
company.
Implications
With this information, managers should understand that to make their employees more
engaged, they should supply them with the correct resources, and find employees who align with
company values. It is rare to find an employee who is always engaged and always loves his or
her job. Yet, this is where the challenge and hindrance stressors come in. Although managers
cannot avoid delegating hindrance demands to employees, they should find a healthy balance
between “grunt work” and stretch projects that help the employee develop along the way. It is
also important to understand how the social exchange theory works; figure out what employees
want, and then give them the resources and support to get there. This theory provides a strong
Conners, 12
foundation for building a lasting, trusting relationship where both the manager and employee
engage themselves for the sake of the other. Managers should also remember to be supportive of
their employees both professionally and personally, and provide rewards and recognition for a
job well done. In the end, engagement does not have to be a complicated process; it can and
should start small so it can become a sustained and prioritized component of the organization.
Conners, 13
References
Bailey, C., Madden, A., Alfes, K., & Fletcher, L. (2017). The Meaning, Antecedents and
Outcomes of Employee Engagement: A Narrative Synthesis. International Journal of
Management Reviews, 19(1), 31–53. https://doiorg.argo.library.okstate.edu/10.1111/ijmr.12077
Bakker, A. B., Albrecht, S. L., & Leiter, M. P. (2011). Key questions regarding work
engagement. European journal of work and organizational psychology, 20(1), 4-28.
Bakker, A. B., & Demerouti, E. (2008). Towards a model of work engagement. Career
development international.
Crawford, E. R., LePine, J. A., & Rich, B. L. (2010). Linking job demands and resources to
employee engagement and burnout: a theoretical extension and meta-analytic
test. Journal of applied psychology, 95(5), 834.
González-Romá, V., Schaufeli, W. B., Bakker, A. B., & Lloret, S. (2006). Burnout and work
engagement: Independent factors or opposite poles?. Journal of vocational
behavior, 68(1), 165-174.
Kinicki, A., & Fugate, M. (2018). Organizational behavior: a practical, problem-solving
approach. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education.
Rich, B. L., Lepine, J. A., & Crawford, E. R. (2010). Job engagement: Antecedents and effects
on job performance. Academy of management journal, 53(3), 617-635.
Saks, A. M. (2006). Antecedents and consequences of employee engagement. Journal of
managerial psychology.