Sun, Li & Bunchapattanasakda, Chanchai. (2019). Employee Engagement: A Literature Review. International Journal of Human Resource Studies. 9. 63. 10.5296/ijhrs.v9i1.14167. 


International  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Studies ISSN  2162-3058 2019,  Vol.  9,  No.  1 http://ijhrs.macrothink.org 63 Employee Engagement: A Literature Review Li Sun PhD Candidate, School of Management, Shinawatra University 99 Moo 10 Bang Toey, Sam Khok District, Pathum Thani 12160, Thailand E-mail: sunli_lizhi@163.com  Chanchai Bunchapattanasakda (corresponding author) Assistant Professor, School of Management, Shinawatra University 99 Moo 10 Bang Toey, Sam Khok District, Pathum Thani 12160, Thailand E-mail: alaskatornado@gmail.com  Received: Dec. 5, 2018   Accepted: Dec. 20, 2018      Online published: Jan. 3, 2019 doi:10.5296/ijhrs.v9i1.14167       URL: https://doi.org/10.5296/ijhrs.v9i1.14167  Abstract Employee engagement is an important issue in management theory and practice. However, there are still major differences in the concept, theory, influencing factors and outcomes of employee  engagement,  and  there  is still  no authoritative  standard. This  paper attempts  to review  and summarize  previous  research  results  on employee  engagement. Two  kinds of definitions of employee engagement are identified: employee engagement as a multi-faceted construct (cognition, emotions and behaviors) and as a unitary construct (a positive state of mind, a  dedicated willingness,  the  opposite of burnout).  Three theoretical frameworks  are used to explain the varying degrees of employee engagement: Needs-Satisfaction framework, Job  Demands-Resources  model  and  Social  Exchange  Theory.  The  influencing  factors  of employee engagement are divided into three categories: organizational factors (management style,  job  rewards,  etc.),  job  factors  (work  environment,  task  characteristics,  etc.)  and individual  factors  (physical  energies,  self-consciousness,  etc.).  Employee  engagement  is found  to  have  a  positive  relationship  with  individual  performance  (organizational commitment, positive behavior, etc.) and organizational performance (customer satisfaction, financial  return,  etc.)  The  research  findings  show  that  there  are  three  shortcomings  in previous  studies:  lack  of  research  on  demographic  variables,  personality  differences  and cross-cultural  differences in  employee  engagement,  lack  of  research  on the  mediating  or moderating role of employee engagement, and lack of intervention mechanism for employee 
  International  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Studies ISSN  2162-3058 2019,  Vol.  9,  No.  1 http://ijhrs.macrothink.org 64 engagement.   Keywords: employee engagement, literature review, recommendations 1. Introduction Employee Engagement has been a hot research topic among positive psychologists, human resource researchers and management practitioners in recent years. Because of the emergence of positive psychology, work engagement, as a positive aspect of psychology, is increasingly popular in occupational health psychology. Engaged employees have a sense of energetic and effective connection with their work activities and see themselves as able to deal well with the demands of their job (Schaufeli & Bakker, 2004). Due to the needs of business practice, many consulting organizations are conducting continuous research on employee engagement by  surveying  employers  and  employees.  Despite  a  plethora  of  research  on  employee engagement, there is a lack of the consistency in its  definitions, measures, antecedents and outcomes.  Besides,  due  to  cultural  differences,  the  same  engagement  techniques  do  not necessarily work for employees in all countries. In the global context, there is no systematic review of the results of the study on employee engagement to date. This review examined the electronic academic journals of EBSCO database, DOAJ database, Google Scholar and CNKI database, electronic books and paper books in English and Chinese.   Objectives of Study 1) Synthesize the definitions and theoretical basis of employee engagement. 2) Synthesize the antecedents associated with employee engagement 3) Synthesize the outcomes associated with employee engagement 2. Definitions of Employee Engagement There  are  different  definitions  of  employee  engagement  among  different  scholars, organizations and different countries  (Table 1). The  concept  of employee engagement was first  proposed  by Kahn  (1990)  as  the  harnessing  of  organization  members’  selves  to  their work  roles;  self-employment  and  self-expression  of  people  physically,  cognitively,  and emotionally in their work lives. Since Kahn proposed this concept, researchers have proposed different definitions which reflect different understanding  of employee engagement in each study, but this caused confusion for business management whether the efforts which improve employee engagement are working in all organizations.   2.1 Employee Engagement as a Multi-faceted Construct May et al. (2004) stated that employee engagement included not only cognition, but also the flexible application  of emotions and  behaviors. Wellins and Concelman  (2005) stated that engagement is a mixture of commitment, loyalty, productivity, and ownership. Saks (2006) defined  employee  engagement  as  a  ―different  and  unique  concept‖  which  is  composed  of knowledge,  emotion  and  behavior.  Cha  (2007)  defined  employee  engagement  as  the employee’s  active  involvement  in  work  and  the  state  of  full  physiology,  cognition,  and emotion  that  accompanies  the  work  engagement,  including  three  dimensions:  work 
  International  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Studies ISSN  2162-3058 2019,  Vol.  9,  No.  1 http://ijhrs.macrothink.org 65 engagement,  organizational  recognition,  and  sense  of  work  value.  Macey  and  Schneider (2008)  suggested  to  regard employee  engagement as  a wide-ranging  term which  contains different types of engagement (traits engagement, psychological state engagement, behavioral engagement), and each one needs different conceptualizations, such as proactive personality (traits  engagement),  involvement  (psychological  state  engagement)  and  organizational citizenship behavior (behavioral engagement). Bakker (2011) summed the engagement as a positive, highly awakened emotional state with two features: energy, and involvement. Soane et  al. (2012)  developed  a  model of  employee  engagement  that  has three  requirements:  a work-role  focus,  activation  and  positive  affect.  Xu  et  al.  (2013)  divided  employee engagement  into  four  dimensions:  organizational  identity,  work  attitude,  mental  state, responsibility effectiveness. Xiao and Duan (2014) stated that employee engagement was a conceptualization  including  five  dimensions:  initiative,  loyalty,  effectiveness,  identity  and commitment.  Liu  (2016)  stated  that  employee  engagement  of  knowledge  worker  was composed of five dimensions: organizational identity, dedication, absorption, vigor, pleasant harmony. 2.2 Employee Engagement as a Dedicated Willingness   Hewitt Organization (2001)  referred to  employee  engagement as the extent  employees  are willing to stay in the company and work hard for the company, reflected in three aspects: 1) ―Say‖:  employees  use  a  positive  language to describe their company, colleagues, and their jobs. 2) ―Stay‖: employees strongly hope to be a member of the company, want to stay in the company for a long time, instead of using existing jobs as a temporary transition. 3) ―Strive‖: employees are willing to devote extra effort to work for the success of the company. Towers organization (2001) defined employee engagement as the degree of willingness and ability of employees  to  help  companies  succeed,  dividing  it into  rational engagement  and  sensuous engagement.  Rational  engagement  generally  involves  the  relationship  between  individuals and  companies,  such  as  the  degree  of  employees’  understanding  of  their  roles  and departmental roles. When work can bring money, professional skills or personal development and  other  benefits,  employees  will  generate  the  sense  of  rational  engagement.  Sensuous engagement depends on employee satisfaction, and the sense of self-achievement from job as a  member  of the  organization (Fang  et  al.,  2010). Xie  (2006) pointed  out  that employee engagement  is  employee’  dedication  to  a  profession,  including  hard  work,  dedicated  to  the company, loyal to the boss, and self-confidence.   2.3 Employee Engagement as a Positive State of Mind Schaufeli et al. (2002) defined engagement as a positive, fulfilling, work-related state of mind that is characterized by vigor, dedication, and absorption, and a more persistent and pervasive affective-cognitive  state  that  is  not  focused  on  any  specific  object,  event,  individual,  or behavior. Harter et al. (2002)  defined employee engagement as the  individual’s involvement and  satisfaction  with  as  well  as  enthusiasm  for  work.  Zeng  and  Han  (2005)  referred  to employee engagement as having a long-lasting, positive emotional and motivational state of awakening their work, ready to devote themselves to work at any time, and are accompanied by pleasant, proud, and encouraging experiences during work. 
  International  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Studies ISSN  2162-3058 2019,  Vol.  9,  No.  1 http://ijhrs.macrothink.org 66 2.4 Employee Engagement as the Opposite of Burnout   Maslach et al. (2001) stated that engagement is an  energy, participation, and effectiveness, corresponding with three features of burnout: exhaustion, cynicism and reduced professional efficacy, and engagement and burnout  are  two ends of a continuum. Schaufeli  and  Bakker (2004)  stated  that vigor  and  dedication  are  direct opposites  of  exhaustion  and  cynicism, respectively.  González-Romá  et  al.  (2006)  expanded  two  groups  of  opposite  dimensions (emotional  exhaustion-vigor,  cynicism-dedication)  as  two  different  and  latent  dimensions (energy and identity). Demerouti  et al. (2010) stated that  cynicism  and dedication are two ends of ―identity‖ dimension, while emotional exhaustion and vigor are not supported as two ends of the ―energy‖ dimension.   Table 1. Definitions of employee engagement Authors Definitions Category Kahn   (1990) The  harnessing  of  organization members’  selves  to  their  work roles;  in  engagement,  people employ  and  express  themselves physically,  cognitively,  and emotionally  during  role performances               Employee engagement as a multi-faceted construct      May et al. (2004) How  the  organization’s  members devote  themselves  to  work, including  not  only  cognition,  but also  the  flexible  application  of emotions and behaviors Wellins & Concelman (2005) A mixture of commitment, loyalty, productivity, and ownership Saks   (2006) The  combination  of  knowledge, emotion and behavior related to the individual’s role performance  Cha   (2007) Employee’s  active  involvement  in work  and  the  state  of  full physiology, cognition, and emotion that  accompanies  the  work engagement,  including  three dimensions:  work  engagement, organizational  recognition,  and sense of work value Bakker (2011) A  positive,  highly  awakened emotional  state with  two  features: energy, and involvement Macey & Schneider (2008) A  wide-ranging  term  which contains  different  types  of engagement  (traits  engagement, psychological  state  engagement, behavioral engagement)   
  International  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Studies ISSN  2162-3058 2019,  Vol.  9,  No.  1 http://ijhrs.macrothink.org 67 Table 1. (continued)   Authors Definitions Category Soane et al. (2012) A  work-role  focus,  activation  and positive affect.     Employee engagement as a multi-faceted construct  Xu et al. (2013) Employees’ organizational identity, work  attitude,  mental  state, responsibility effectiveness Xiao & Duan (2014) Employees’  initiative,  loyalty, effectiveness,  recognition  and commitment Liu   (2016) Employees’ organizational identity, dedication,  absorption,  vigor, pleasant harmony Hewitt Consulting (2001) The  extent  how  employees  are willing to stay in the company and work  hard  for  the  company, including three  elements:  say, stay and strive     Employee engagement as a dedicated willingness   Towers Consulting (2001) Degree  of  willingness  and  ability of  employees  to  help  companies succeed,  including  rational  and sensuous engagement Xie   (2006) A  sense  of  professional responsibility, including hard work, dedicated to the company, loyal to the boss, and self-confidence Schaufeli et al. (2002) A positive,  fulfilling,  work-related state  of  mind that  is characterized by  vigor,  dedication,  and absorption     Employee engagement as a positive state of mind    Harter et al. (2002) The  individual’s  involvement  and satisfaction  with  as  well  as enthusiasm for work Zeng & Han (2005) Having  a  long-lasting,  positive emotional and motivational state of awakening  their  work,  ready  to devote  themselves to  work  at  any time,  and  are  accompanied  by pleasant,  proud,  and  encouraging experiences during work  
  International  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Studies ISSN  2162-3058 2019,  Vol.  9,  No.  1 http://ijhrs.macrothink.org 68 Table 1. (continued) Authors Definitions Category Maslach et al. (2001) The  opposites  of three  features of burnout:  energy, participation,  and effectiveness     Employee engagement as the opposite of burnout Schaufeli & Bakker   (2004) The  opposites  of  two  features  of burnout: vigor and Dedication González-Romá et al. (2006) The  opposite  of  cynicism  of burnout: dedication Demerouti et al.   (2010) Independent of burnout: vigor     3. Theoretical Frameworks of Employee Engagement A wide range of theoretical frameworks  have  been used to explain employee engagement. Different researchers explain employee engagement from different theoretical perspectives in their  own  empirical  study.  There  is  no  unique  theoretical  framework  for  employee engagement  to  date.  In  this  review,  needs-satisfaction  framework,  JD-R  Framework  and social exchange theory are discussed to explain employee engagement as follows (Table 2). The needs-satisfaction framework is first reflected in Kahn’s (1990) definition of engagement. Kahn  (1990)  supposed  that  employees  are  more  engaged  in  their  work,  when  three psychological needs are satisfied: meaningfulness (sense of return on investments of self in role  performance),  safety  (sense  of  being  able  to  show  and employ  self  without  fear  of negative consequences to self-image, status, or career), availability (sense of possessing the physical,  emotional,  and  psychological  resources  necessary  for  investing  self  in  role performances). When the organization fails to provide these resources, individuals are more likely to withdraw and defend themselves from their roles. Meaningfulness is influenced by the nature of the job; that is,  its tasks, roles, and work interactions. Psychological safety is mainly influenced  by the  social  environment; that is,  by  interpersonal relationships, group and intergroup dynamics, management style and process, and organizational norms. Finally, availability depends on the personal resources that people can bring to their role performance, such as physical energies, emotional energies, insecurity and outside life.       Employee engagement is also affected by Job Demands-Resources Model (Salanova et al., 2005; Bakker et al., 2005; Hakanen et al., 2006; Schaufeli et al., 2009; Xanthopoulou et al., 2009; Crawford et al., 2010; Salminen et al., 2014). Job Demands–Resources (JD–R) model believe that different organizations may be confronted with different working environments, but  the  characteristics  of  these  environments  can  be  always  classified  in  two  general categories—job  demands and  job  resources—thus  constituting  an  overarching  model  that may be applied to various occupational settings, irrespective of the particular demands and resources  involved.  Job  demands  refer  to  those  physical,  psychological,  social,  or organizational  aspects  of  the  job  that  require  sustained  physical  and/or  psychological (cognitive and emotional) effort and are therefore associated with certain physiological and/or 
  International  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Studies ISSN  2162-3058 2019,  Vol.  9,  No.  1 http://ijhrs.macrothink.org 69 psychological costs. Examples are a high work pressure, role overload, poor environmental conditions  and  problems  related  to  reorganization.  Job  resources  refer  to  those  physical, psychological, social, or organizational aspects of the job that are either/or: (1) functional in achieving  work  goals;  (2)  reduce  job  demands  and  the  associated  physiological  and psychological costs;  (3)  stimulate personal growth and  development  (Bakker et al., 2003). Thus, the JD-R model can explain the assumption that employees are more likely to engage with their work when they get job-related resources from the organization.   A stronger theoretical rationale for explaining employee engagement can be found in social exchange theory  (SET). Levinson  (1965)  stated that  employment  is a transaction  between labor, loyalty  and  actual  interest, and  social rewards.  To a  certain extent,  the relationship between employee and employer is suitable for reciprocity, in which a request for return will lead  to  beneficial  results  to  both  parties  no  matter  who  gain  the  preferential  treatment. Masterson  et  al.  (2000)  proposed  that  one  party  expects  a  return  in  the  future  after contributing or providing  services  to the  other  party. At the same time, the  party that gets something  of  value  will  produce  a  sense  of  responsibility  to  return  the  other  party.  For individuals  who  have  helped  them,  employees  will  actively  give  a  return  to  gain  more benefits  in the  future.  Many  scholars  analyzed the  relationship  between  organization  and members based on social exchange theory. Employees are loyal to the organization and work hard  in  exchange  for  economic  benefits  and  social  rewards,  establishing  the organization-employee  relationship. Eisenberger  et  al.  (1986)  stated  that  high  levels  of perceived  organizational  support  create  obligations  within  individuals  to  repay  the organization, thereby demonstrating an attitude and behavior conducive to the organization. Saks (2006) argued that one way for individuals to repay their organization is through their level of engagement. In other words, employees will choose to engage themselves to varying degrees in response to the resources they received from their organization.   Table 2. Theoretical frameworks of employee engagement Theories Authors Characteristics   Needs-Satisfaction Framework   Kahn   (1990) Meaningfulness: sense of return on investments of self in role performance Safety:  sense of  being  able to  show  and employ self  without  fear  of  negative  consequences  to self-image, status, or career Availability:  sense  of  possessing  the  physical, emotional,  and psychological  resources necessary for investing self in role performances     
  International  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Studies ISSN  2162-3058 2019,  Vol.  9,  No.  1 http://ijhrs.macrothink.org 70 Table 2. (continued) Theories Authors Characteristics   Job Demands-Resources Model    Bakker et al. (2003) Job demands refer to those physical, psychological, social,  or  organizational  aspects  of  the  job  that require  sustained  physical  and/or  psychological (cognitive and  emotional)  effort and  are therefore associated  with  certain  physiological  and/or psychological costs. Job  resources  refer  to  those  physical, psychological, social,  or organizational aspects  of the job that are either/or: 1) functional in achieving work  goals;  2)  reduce  job  demands  and  the associated  physiological  and  psychological  costs; 3) stimulate personal growth and development. Social Exchange   Theory Levinson   (1965) A request for return will lead to beneficial results to both  parties  no  matter  who  gain  the  preferential treatment.  Masterson et al. (2000) One  party  expects  a  return  in  the  future  after contributing  or  providing  services  to  the  other party.  At  the  same  time,  the  party  that  gets something  of  value  will  produce  a  sense  of responsibility to return the other party. Eisenberger et al.     (1986) High  levels  of  perceived  organizational  support create  obligations  within individuals  to repay  the organization, thereby demonstrating an attitude and behavior conducive to the organization. Saks   (2006) Employees  will  choose  to  engage  themselves  to varying  degrees and  in response  to the  resources they receive from their organization. 4. Antecedents and Outcomes of Employee Engagement   Employee  engagement  refers  to employees’  physical,  cognitive  and  emotional input in  the work. Past researches showed that  the  influencing  factors of employee engagement can  be summarized  as  three  categories:  organizational  factors  (leadership,  superior  support,  job resources, fairness, etc.),  job factors  (work environment, job  participation, job enrichment, etc.) and individual factors  (extraversion, resilience, self-consciousness, etc.). The research on consequences  of employee engagement mainly  focus on two  aspects—the influence  of employee  engagement  on  individual  performance  (enthusiasm,  excellence,  satisfaction, devotion,  etc.)  and  on  organizational  performance  (productivity,  profitability,  customer loyalty, etc.)    
  International  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Studies ISSN  2162-3058 2019,  Vol.  9,  No.  1 http://ijhrs.macrothink.org 71 4.1 Antecedents of Employee Engagement   The  antecedent  variables  of  employee  engagement  can  be  divided  into  three  categories: organizational factors, job  factors and individual factors  (see Table 3). Most  of researches focus on one or two of the three factors, except for the research of May et al. (2004). Kahn (1990)  proposed  that  task characteristics,  role characteristics,  work interaction,  group and inter-group dynamics, management style & process, organizational norms have an influence on  employee  engagement. Harter  et  al.  (2002)  pointed  out that  work environment,  direct supervisor, senior management team, colleagues have an influence on employee engagement. Salanova and  Schaufeli (2008) stated  that  job control, job  participation, job feedback,  job rewards, job security, supervisor support have an influence on employee engagement. May et al.  (2004)  stated  that  job  enrichment,  work  role  fit,  rewarding  co-worker,  supportive supervisor and  self-consciousness have an influence  on employee engagement. Zhang  and Gan  (2005)  found that  support, sense  of fairness,  interpersonal  consumption,  and conflict have an influence on employee engagement. The research of Langelaan et al. (2006) stated that neuroticism, extraversion and mobility have an influence on employee engagement. Job  demands-resources  theory  believes  that  job  resources  and  personal  resources independently  or  together predict  employee  engagement.  When high  job  requirements are required,  job  resources  and  personal  resources  have  a  more  positive  impact on  employee engagement. Therefore, job  resources and job demands are  two very important antecedent variables for  employee  engagement. Job resources can  reduce the impact of  job demands, promote job  goal  and stimulate personal growth, learning  and development.  Schaufeli and Bakker  (2004),  Bakker  and Demerouti  (2008), Xanthopoulou  et al.  (2009)  stated that  the available  job  resources  are  the  main  predictors  of  engagement.  Farndale’s  (2015)  study showed  that  certain  job  resources  (financial  returns,  team  atmosphere,  participation  in decision-making)  positively  affect  employee  engagement  in  three  countries  (Mexico, Netherlands,  and  the  United  States).  The  cross-cultural  theory  was  used  to  explain  the differ  In  terms  of  personal  resources,  dedicated  employees  seem  to  be  different  from  other employees,  including  optimism,  self-efficacy,  and  self-esteem,  resilience,  positive  coping style, and demographic variables. These resources can help dedicated employee control and influence their work environment, so personal resources can promote employee dedication. Bakker et al. (2006) found that resilience is an individual resource that promotes employee engagement in the study of female headmasters. Xanthopoulou (2009) also studied personal resources such as self-efficacy, self-esteem, and optimism as important factors in predicting engagement.  Empirical  analysis  of Rich  et al.  (2010)  showed  that  nuclear  self-evaluation (self-esteem, self-efficacy, control points and stable emotion) and engagement are positively correlated. Simbula  et al.  (2011)  found  that self-efficacy  has a  short-term (4  months)  and long-term (8 months) lag impact on engagement. Christian et al. (2011) showed that there is a positive  correlation  between  responsibility,  positive  emotions,  positive  personality,  and engagement.  Gan  and  Gan’s  (2014)  empirical  study  showed  that  extraversion, conscientiousness  affect engagement  through job  requirements or  resources. The  study of Roof (2015) showed that there is a relationship between spirituality and vigor and dedication. 
  International  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Studies ISSN  2162-3058 2019,  Vol.  9,  No.  1 http://ijhrs.macrothink.org 72 Thompson et al. (2015) stated the direct and indirect impact of positive psychological capital on employee engagement. In the longitudinal study of Korean hotel employees, Paek et al. (2015) found that  front-line staff with high psychological capital invest more  in  their own work.   Table 3. Antecedents of employee engagement Authors Antecedents Categories Kahn (1990) task  characteristics,  role characteristics, work interaction job factors group  and  inter-group  dynamics, management  style  and  process, organizational norms organizational factors physical  energies,  emotional energies, insecurity, outside life individual factors Harter et al.   (2002) work environment, job factors direct  supervisor,  senior management team, colleagues organizational factors May et al.   (2004) job enrichment   job factor work role fit, rewarding co-worker, supportive supervisor organizational factors self-consciousness individual factor Schaufeli & Bakker (2004),   Bakker & Demerouti (2008) Xanopoulou et al. (2009)   available job resources   organizational factor Zhang & Can   (2005) support,  sense  of  fairness, interpersonal  consumption,  and conflict  organizational factors Langelaan et al. (2006) neuroticism,  extraversion  and mobility individual factors Bakker et al.   (2006) resilience individual factors Salanova et Schaufeli (2008) job  control,  job  participation,  job feedback, job rewards, job security, supervisor support organizational factors Xanthopoulou   (2009) self-efficacy,  self-esteem,  and optimism individual factors   
  International  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Studies ISSN  2162-3058 2019,  Vol.  9,  No.  1 http://ijhrs.macrothink.org 73 Table 3. (continued) Authors Antecedents Categories Rich et al.   (2010) self-esteem,  self-efficacy,  control points and stable emotion individual factors Simbula et al.   (2011) self-efficacy individual factors Christian et al.   (2011) responsibility,  positive  emotions, positive personality individual factors Gan & Gan   (2014) extraversion, conscientiousness individual factors Roof   (2015) spirituality individual factors Thompson et al.   (2015)   Paek et al.   (2015)  positive psychological capital  individual factors Farndale   (2015) financial returns, team atmosphere, participation in decision-making organizational factors 4.2 Outcomes of Employee Engagement At  present,  the  research  on  employee  engagement  outcomes  are  mainly  focused  on  two aspects—individual  performance  and  organizational  performance,  among  which,  the relationship between employee engagement and organizational performance is the focus of current research (Table 4). Dedicated employees are more active in their  work,  have  better health, and perform better (Susana et al., 2007). Compared with employees who are not dedicated, dedicated employees get more satisfaction from work, higher organizational commitment, and less willingness to leave the organization (Yang, 2005). Dedicated employees have positive behavior (Wilmar & Arnold, 2006). Overall, dedicated employees have more active organizational behaviors and are willing to pay more. This has been validated in the study of Dutch employees, in which engaged  employees  have  more  overtime  than  disengaged  employees  (Sonnentag,  2003). Salanova et al. (2005) studied  the relationship between organizational resources, employee engagement, and employee performance. Based on a survey of 342 employees in 114 hotels, it  was  concluded  that  organizational  resources  can  have  a  positive  impact  on  employee engagement,  in  turn,  employee  engagement  will  have  a  positive  impact  on  employee performance. Saks (2006), based on the research conducted on 102 employees from different organizations, concluded that employee engagement has a positive impact on organizational citizenship behavior. In the theoretical model constructed by Bakker and Demerouti (2008), employee engagement has a positive effect on employees’ out-of-role performance.   Some  empirical  researched showed  that  there  is a  positive correlation  between  employee engagement and organizational performance.  Harter et al. (2002) research  showed  that the correlation between  employee  engagement and employee turnover  is  -0.30, the correlation 
  International  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Studies ISSN  2162-3058 2019,  Vol.  9,  No.  1 http://ijhrs.macrothink.org 74 with customer satisfaction is 0.33, and the correlation with employee profit is 0.17. Salanova et  al.  (2005)  found  that  the  level  of  employee  engagement  can  affect  the  organization’s service climate  through the study  of  the quality of  hotel and restaurant  services,  and thus affect  the  performance  of  employees  and  customer  loyalty.  Wyatt  Consulting’s  research showed  that employee  engagement  is closely  related  to  shareholder returns.  The  average return to shareholders by employees with lower engagement, medium engagement, and high engagement within 3 years are 76 percent, 90 percent and 112 percent, respectively (Zhao & Sun, 2010). Xanthopoulou et al. (2009) stated that employee engagement can have a positive effect on the financial performance of the organization. Based on human strengths, after years of empirical analysis, Harter et al. (2002) proved that employee engagement is a ―soft index‖ that  affects  organizational  performance,  and  it  is  related  to  the  five  major  indicators  of organizational performance—productivity, profitability, customer loyalty, employee retention, and security.   Table 4. Outcomes of employee engagement Authors Outcomes Categories Xanthopoulou   (2009) financial performance of  the organization organizational performance Harter et al.   (2002) employee  profit,  employee turnover individual performance customer  satisfaction, organization’s  service climate organizational performance Sonnentag (2003) more overtime individual performance Salanova et al.   (2005) employee performance individual performance Yang   (2005) more satisfaction from work, higher  organizational commitment,  less willingness to leave  individual performance Wilmar & Arnold (2006) positive behavior individual performance Saks   (2006) organizational  citizenship behavior individual performance Susana et al. (2007) more  active  in  work,  better health, better performance   individual performance Bakker & Demerouti   (2008) employees’  out-of-role performance individual performance Zhao & Sun   (2010) return to shareholders   organizational performance 5. Conclusion 5.1 Summary Employee engagement is an important concept to organizational leaders and employees alike. This  paper,  through  the  review  of  definitions,  theories,  antecedents  and  outcomes  of employee engagement, highlighted what the body of research has  indicated on the topic of employee  engagement.  Employee  engagement  usually  refers  to  employees’  physical, 
  International  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Studies ISSN  2162-3058 2019,  Vol.  9,  No.  1 http://ijhrs.macrothink.org 75 cognitive  and  emotional  input  in  the  work.  Needs-Satisfaction  framework,  Job Demands-Resources model and Social Exchange Theory have been used to explain varying levels  of  employee  engagement  in  the  organizations.  According  to  Needs-Satisfaction framework,  employees’  sense  of  meaningfulness  of  work  elements,  job  security  and  the availability  of  personal  resources  determine  their  engagement  in  role  performances. According to JD-R model, high-levels of job-related and personal resources can reduce the exhaustion and other negative outcomes caused by job demands which require employees to pay additional efforts. According to social exchange theory, relationships between employees and employers are based on norms of reciprocity. When employees feel that they are being treated well and valued by their employer, they are more likely to respond by exerting effort on behalf of the employer in the form of raised levels of engagement (Alfes et al., 2013a). With  regard  to  variables  related  to  employee  engagement,  antecedent  variables  mainly include  three  categories:  organizational  factors,  job  factors  and  individual  factors,  and outcome  variables  are  mainly  focused  on  individual  performance  and  organizational performance. 5.2 Discussion The  literature  review  of  employee  engagement  reflected  the  following  results.  First, employee engagement starts with the personal work experience and is a typically individual decision that cannot be forced. It involves individual employees, not organizations. Therefore, employee  engagement  is  an  individual-level  concept,  not a  group-level  concept.  Second, employee engagement is an active, work-related psychological state that includes perceptions, emotions, and behaviors, with the features of energy and involvement. Thus, engagement can be  experienced  emotionally,  cognitively,  and  be  displayed  behaviorally.  Third,  the relationship between burnout and engagement is complicated. The empirical results showed that  burnout  and  engagement  were  two  ends  of  the  same  continuum  in  one  dimension (cynicism-dedication),  but  independent  of  each  other  in  another  dimension  (emotional exhaustion-vigor). Therefore, engagement cannot simply be expressed in the opposite mode of burnout scores but requires a specialized and independent measurement. Fourth, employee engagement is a composite of attitude and behavior. The dedication, involvement, and other cognitive and emotional components in the engagement reflect the attitudes of the employees, while vigor and absorption reflect the employees’ physical input and are displayed  through employee behavior. Fifth, most of researches focus on the influencing factors (organizational, individual, job)  of  employee  engagement,  this indicates employee engagement  is  a widely concerned issue among the academia and business practitioners. Besides, the contributions of employee engagement  to organizational performance indicates  the critical role  of  engaged employees to the success of an enterprise. 5.3 Limitation This  paper  made  a  literature  review  of  employee  engagement,  but  this  review  does  not capture all the studies in areas related to employee engagement because of the limited time and  resources.  First,  this  review  examined  only  some  studies  published  in  peer-viewed journals and  books which  are mainly  viewed online.  Second, there  are too  many research 
  International  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Studies ISSN  2162-3058 2019,  Vol.  9,  No.  1 http://ijhrs.macrothink.org 76 findings  about  the  definitions,  theoretical  basis,  antecedents  and  outcomes  of  employee engagement, this  paper only  reviewed some  of  them  according  to  the  author’s  propensity which will inevitably lead to bias and incompleteness of the review of employee engagement. Third, employee engagement in this  review  refers to individual engagement, not involving team engagement and organizational engagement. 5.4 Recommendations for Future Research   A wide range of studies have been conducted on employee engagement since Kahn (1990) made up the concept of engagement (Kahn, 1990), but there is still much research to be done in the area of employee engagement. From this literature review, there seems to be a lack of research focusing on  the impact of employees’ demographics, personality  traits and cultural differences on engagement. The comparative studies of cross-national employee engagement are scarce  except for  famous Utrecht  Work Engagement  Scale. Besides, the researches  on employee engagement are  mainly  focused on its  antecedents  and outcomes, neglecting the mediating or moderating role of employee engagement between some variables. Finally, this review shows a major deficiency that researchers have to pay attention to, that is, there is a lack of the research on the intervention measures which best reflect the practical values of employee engagement research in the human resource management  field. Therefore, it’s my hope  that  future  research  can  explore  the  mediating  or  moderating  role  of  employee engagement,  enrich  the  antecedents  of  employee  engagement  by  adding  factors  of demographics,  personality,  cross-culture,  and  make  empirical  studies  on  the  intervention measures  improving  employee  engagement  by  longitudinal  survey  so  as  to  better  guide management practice.     Acknowledgement Thanks for Assistant Prof. Chanchai Bunchapattanasakda, Shinawatra University.