Allam, Z. (2017). International Review of Management and Marketing Employee Disengagement: A Fatal Consequence to Organization and its Ameliorative Measures. International Review of Management and Marketing, 7(2), 49–52. https://dergipark.org.tr/tr/download/article-file/367508

‌


International Review of Management and
Marketing
ISSN 2146-4405
available at http www.econjournals.com
International Review of Management and Marketing, 2017, 7(2), 49-52.
International Review of Management and Marketing  Vol 7 • Issue 2 • 2017 49
Employee Disengagement A Fatal Consequence to Organization
and its Ameliorative Measures
Zafrul Allam
Department of Human Resource Management, College of Business Administration, Prince Sattam bin Abdulaziz University,
Al-Kharj 11942, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Email z.allam@psau.edu.sa
ABSTRACT
The consequences of employee disengagement are vulnerable to any organization and considered as an epidemic to the business enterprises. The
current paper aimed to highlight the concepts, survey available literature to probe the notions related to employee disengagement. The review of the
literature provided ample information to differentiate between engaged and disengaged employees in terms of involvement, satisfaction, commitment,
performance, trust, enthusiasm, stress and so on. Further, the author noticed that developed nations have alarming percentage of employee disengagement.
The significance of this particular paper provides the ample concept and literature to understand the outcomes of employee disengagement which is
harmful to the organizations and individuals. Albeit, the present study suggested some measures, implement to enhance the level of engagement of
employees in the organizations.
Keywords Engagement, Disengagement, Outcomes of Disengagement, Employees
JEL Classification M
1. INTRODUCTION
It is universally accepted the notion that disengaged employees
are not taking part in the problem solving and delinked their
thinking patterns with the accomplishment of vision, purpose and
values of the organization. Further, such employees are not putting
their whole efforts to maximize the productivity in an excellent
manner but showing the lack of interest in doing so like an easy
going person. The president study tried to explore to understand
the consequences of employee disengagement at work with the
help of various study conducted in previous years. On the basis
of different study, it can be said that it is an epidemic and needs
to eradicate such evil behaviors to make the organization more
effective.
It is imperative to highlight that disengaged employees are not
essentially wicked one but doing their required amount of work
necessary to accomplish the task and occasionally not providing
the solution to make the workplace more effective and conducive
to discharge the responsibilities. However, disengaged employees
showing the lackadaisical attitude towards the work and doing the
work within the specified time period of work but not staying at
the workplace beyond the stipulated time period or more hour or
late hour and even they don’t want to revisit their own work after
finish a day of work.
In every organization manger’s role is to influence, motivate and
inspire employees to provide results but also concerned to those
who are disengaged in their work seems to be true. Thereby,
disengagement of employees is considered as an epidemic in
the organization. Gallup poll conducted in 2014 in the United
States observed that only 31% employees working with full
enthusiasm and engaged with their work whereas 51% were “not
engaged” and 17.5% “actively disengaged.” The outcome of
this poll revealed that majority of the employees in the USA are
disengaged in their work and showing less concern to perform
the task showing less concern to perform the task (Adkins,2014).
Mark (2012) in his article “Workplace Wrangler citing the
Economist)” observed that majority of the higher level of manager
leader (84%) were disengaged employee who are considered as
serious threats for the business.
Allam Employee Disengagement A Fatal Consequence to Organization and its Ameliorative Measures
50 International Review of Management and Marketing  Vol 7 • Issue 2 • 2017
Disengagement refers to “a lack of commitment, interest and
enthusiasm to work or a workplace.” It represents that disengaged
workforce are less committed and involved in their work and
chances are there that they might leave the organization.
Disengagement can be defined by keeping in mind Schaufeli and
Bakker works as “a negative, unfulfilling, work-related state of
mind that is characterized by weaker, infidelity and disloyalty.”
In realm of management and social science the term engagement
is associated with job involvement and flow of the employees
(Lawler and Hall, 1970; Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). Whereas, job
involvement refers “the degree to which job situation is central
to the person and hisher identity” and flow refers to “holistic
sensation that people feel when they act with total involvement.”
It is concluded that employee involvement is one of the passions
for completing the task, if not indicates low level of productivity
and showing the sign of disengagement.
Kahn (1990) conceptualized personal disengagement as “the
withdrawing or defending of oneself physically, cognitively or
emotionally during their work role performance.” From this
definition, it seems that disengaged employees are detached
emotionally and cognitively from the real work set up and their
behavior became unresponsive, robotic, effortless towards their
performance. This might be due to several reasons such as lack of
autonomy, perceived little opportunity of advancement in the job
and lack of interaction, absence of motivation from superiors and
so on. Since employees satisfaction, commitment and involvement
are missing; their intention and purposes disappeared invain to
perform in the organization.
2. REVIEW OF LITERATURE
Various researchers conceptualized disengagement and tried to
explore and understand the reasons for disengagement of the
employees. They found an association between disengagement
with personal and professional characteristic. The researcher
tried to explore the notion from the perspectives of employee
engagement to understand disengagement at workplace.
Additionally, it is imperative to explain that review has been
done with the help of understanding the concept of employee
engagement with various constructs taken into consideration
among diverse employees working in different sectors.
Schaufeli et al. (2002) defined work engagement as “a constructive,
satisfying, state of mind that is characterized by enthusiasm,
dedication, and absorption.” In the light of this particular
definition, it can be infer that lack of enthusiasm, absorption and
dedication, people cannot involve in their job fully to get things
done in a stipulated time period. Abraham (2012) was having the
opinion that there is an association between stay in the organization
and discharge their responsibility with employee engagement. On
the basis of the review of literature, we can say that various reasons
have been identified to differentiate engaged and disengaged
employees. Fredrickson (2001) argued that employees who will
be engaged showing positive emotions, enthusiasm and joy. This
indicates that while employee will be on the work using personal
resources to get the works done. When employees engaged in
their work, perceive psychological well-being and health, it refers
to such employees who focus all resources in terms of personal
skills and power resources to their responsibilities. As Harter et al.
(2002) suggested that manager may motivate their employees
towards the realistic outcome, when they were having more
engagement at their work. It is important to put emphasis that job
satisfaction, commitment, involvement and lessen the role stress
are the variables having association with the employees working
in the organization to make more effective towards the outcomes
of the organization and fully engaged in the work, in the absence
of these might lead to disengaged with their work (Allam, 2013;
Al-Kahtani and Allam, 2014; Allam, 2007; Stephen, 2011; Ali and
Allam, 2016; Allam and Rezene, 2009).
Bakker and Xanthopoulou (2009) have the opinion that engaged
employees transfer their engagement to others to do the task. It
means that engaged person can easily transfer the good things to
others and build a team to generate collaborative efforts to perform
exceptionally in their work settings. Albeit, Bakker et al. (2004)
revealed the fact that colleagues used to give higher ratings to those
employees who perform better on the role and extra-role performance
representing that such employees shouldering the responsibilities in
an extraordinary manner and urge to go the outstanding.
Heikkeri (2010) said the disengaged employees are considered as
one of the dimensions of organizational structure in the form of
their severity i.e., complex in nature and also leads to change the
behavior in negative directions. Further, the researcher suggested
that such complex behavior is detrimental to the organization and
therefore the authority needs academic and managerial skills to
understand and dealt with such employees to make things happen
in a normal manner.
Halbesleben and Wheeler (2008) observed the positive correlation
between ratings by the higher officials and employee engagement
in relations to performance in the United States in different
occupations. It indicates that disengagement employees have
the low rating by their own supervisors and found detachment
with their work and the lower level of performance. Al-Kahtani
and Allam (2013) has said in their study that value play pivotal
role to keep away people from various unusual activities. In
similar fashion Koodamara (2016) initiated a study to explore the
correlation between job satisfaction, organizational commitment
and employee engagement and revealed the statistical significant
difference between these variables. Further, they found the positive
relationship between engagement and job satisfaction. But in the
case of employee disengagement, it can be say that there would
be no positive relationship with job satisfaction, commitment and
stay in the organization.
2.1. Outcomes of Employee Disengagement
Various outcomes have been explored on the basis of the
review of literature; the following aspects have been identified
by academicians and management practitioners pertaining to
disengagement of the employees.
i. Negative job attitude The attitude of the employees who are
not taking part in the work seems to be dissatisfied with job,
Allam Employee Disengagement A Fatal Consequence to Organization and its Ameliorative Measures
International Review of Management and Marketing  Vol 7 • Issue 2 • 2017 51
uncommitted, lack of organizational citizenship behavior and
so on. These types of employees are not able to generate energy
or enthusiasm to do the task and showing negative attitudes at
work. Saks (2006) observed that disengaged employees most
of the time showed no commitment, dissatisfaction and intent
to leave the organization.
ii. The absence of teamwork Showing little cooperation and
collaboration to get things done together as team members.
iii. Rigidness to accept feedback Disengaged workers don’t show
courage to listen the truth about their performance and not
accepting their criticism given by others.
iv. Lack of trust The disengaged employees hide all information
and not sharing ideas, opinions, views and information with
anyone due to lack of trust. Allam and Harish (2010) suggested
that trust is having correlation with job satisfaction.
v. Low morale The disengaged employees showing less
confidence, spirit, discipline and energy to perform in
the organization. As suggested by Branham (2005) that
disengaged employees often negatively impact on income
and morale of the employees.
vi. No learning Engaged employees wants to get new knowledge
and information whereas, disengaged employee not showing
interest to get new skill and abilities towards their work to
complete the task assigned to them.
vii. The higher rate of turnover Due to disengagement in the
job at the workplace the rate of voluntarily or involuntarily
leaving the organization will be more than what is expected
in the business set up by the management.
viii.More workplace violence and bullying Workplace violence
and bullying both are unacceptable at the workplace but
disengaged employees show such actions in the form of
aggressiveness, fighting, physical assault, threatening
behavior, abusive, teasing and regular jokes at workplace with
someone.
ix. More health problem Disengaged employees observed to
have more headaches, stomach problems and cardiovascular
disorder due to the characteristic shown during the working
hours.
x. Higher conflict The relationship of disengaged employees
with subordinate, peers and superiors observed unhealthy,
disagreement and bitterness reflects the higher level of
conflict.
xi. More absenteeism The disengaged employees frequently
keeping themselves away from real work situation and have
unusual reasons for not reporting to work.
xii. The lower level of productivity It has been noticed that
disengaged employees not putting all efforts to make better
performance and complaining others fault and by the results
their productivity is low.
xiii.The higher rate of accident and safety problem Safety at work
is considered as a tool to avoid the accident at workplace.
Disengaged employees paying the lower level of attention
towards the hazardous element at work, ignoring defects in
machine, tools and equipment and putting the employees’ life
into danger or accidental situations.
xiv. More deviant workplace behavior Employees who are
disengaged at work not obeying the rules and regulations
of the corporatebusiness sector and indulge in varieties of
deviant behavior such as vandalism, sabotage the resources
and infrastructure, spreading the rumor, acting rudely with
seniorsjuniors.
xv. Lateness Employees not reporting on the time at workplace
of start of the work and used to come late and explains that on
the way it was an accident, heavy traffic and transportations
problems. As Blau (1994) observed three different types of
lateness such as pattern, duration and frequency. Disengaged
employees are always showing these attributes towards the
lateness or delay.
xvi. Loss of cultural values Researchers have observed that culture
influences the entire organization but if the organization has
disengaged employees automatically they will sabotage the
culture and have the greater effect on productivity.
xvii. Postponementwithhold of works Disengaged employees
have one of the personality characteristics that they do not
keenly taking all things in serious manner or keeping away
from the seriousnessurgency of the work. Most of the time
such employees used to withhold of works and postponed
the task for another day or time.
xviii. No innovation and creativity They do not provide new ideas,
views, opinion or any kinds of creativity to the organization
to make more effective results at work.
xix. Lack of interpersonal relations Disengaged employees
showing little concernedrelations towards different
stakeholder particularly customers. Such employees harm the
organization because they have lack of interpersonal relations
in dealing with the customer satisfaction would be a great loss
of the organization (Vajda and SpiritHeart, 2008).
Moreover, the aforesaid ideas generated by the author to delve into
the knowledge, skills and opinion related to disengaged employees.
In brief, disengaged employees placing the organization in the
negative directions and that may be huge costs to the organizations.
It can be well understand through the below diagram
3. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE
RECOMMENDATIONS
On the basis of conceptual framework, understanding, review of
the literature and results due to disengagement of the employees
discussed above, it is necessary to have ideal human resource
practices in every organization to overcome from such demonic
characteristics of employees to make them engaged in work set
up. Aristotle said “In the arena of human life, the honors and
rewards fall to those who show their good qualities in action.”
Albeit, it is the responsibilities of higher officials to make them
engaged in their work necessary to give financial and non-financial
rewards to their quality work performed in the organization and to
delve into their abilities to shoulder the task prescribed to them.
Management must be open to discuss the issues through proper
communications. Training should be given to the employees to
enhance knowledge, ability, attitude and skills to perform task
Allam Employee Disengagement A Fatal Consequence to Organization and its Ameliorative Measures
52 International Review of Management and Marketing  Vol 7 • Issue 2 • 2017
and engaged at work. Generate trust, match the roles, create
a conducive environment or atmosphere, create a culture of
meaning of work and develop interpersonal skills to minimize
disengagement at the workplace and have the engagement in their
work. This study has own limitations and the author suggested
that there is a need to have the exhaustive review of the literature
to provide meaningfulness to the variables taken in the present
exploratory study to understand in a better manner.
REFERENCES
Abraham, S. (2012), Development of employee engagement programme
on the basis of employee satisfaction survey. Journal of Economic
Development, Management, IT, Finance and Marketing, 4(1), 27-37.
Adkins, A.(2014), Majority of U.S. employees not engaged despite gains in
2014. httpwww.gallup.compoll181289majority-employees-notengaged-despite-gains-2014.aspx. [Last accessed on 2016 Nov 20].
Al Kahtani, N.S., Allam, Z. (2013), Exploring value preferences among
students An empirical study of Salman bin Abdulaziz University.
Journal of American Science, 9(12), 44-53.
Al Kahtani, N.S., Allam, Z. (2014), An empirical assessment of impact
of demographical factors on job satisfaction amongst Saudi Arabia
bank employees. MAGNT Research Report, 2(4), 92-99.
Ali, N., Allam, Z. (2016), Antecedents and outcomes of interpersonal
trust and general role stress The case of Prince Sattam bin Abdulaziz
University employees. International Journal of Economic Research,
13(1), 395-411.
Allam, Z. (2007), A study of relationship of job anxiety and job burnout
with job involvement among bank employees. Management and
Labor Studies, 21(1), 30-38.
Allam, Z. (2013), Job anxiety, organizational commitment and job
satisfaction An empirical assessment of supervisors in the state
of Eritrea. International Journal of Development and Management
Review, 8, 50-62.
Allam, Z., Harish, K.T. (2010), Influence of socio-demographic factors
on job burnout and satisfaction among Eritrean medical workers.
Nigerian Journal of Psychiatry, 8(1), 43-47.
Allam, Z., Rezene, H. (2009), Impact of job burnout, age and marital
status on job involvement among banking employees in Eritrea.
The Nigerian Journal of Guidance and Counseling, 14(1), 28-34.
Available from httpwww.gallup.compoll181289majority-employeesnot-engaged-despite-gains-2014.aspx.
Available from httpwww.stephenjgill.typepad.comperformance_
improvement_b20111220-signs-of-employee-disengagement.
html.
Bakker, A.B., Demerouti, E., Verbeke, W. (2004), Using the job
demands—resources model to predict burnout and performance.
Human Resource Management, 43, 83-104.
Bakker, A.B., Xanthopoulou, D. (2009), The crossover of daily work
engagement Test of an actor–partner interdependence model. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 94, 1562-1571.
Blau, G. (1994), Developing and testing a taxonomy of lateness behavior.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 79(6), 959-970.
Branham, L. (2005), The 7 hidden reasons employees leave How to
recognize the subtle signs and act before it’s too late. Saranac Lake,
NY, USA AMACOM.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975), Beyond Boredom and Anxiety. San
Francisco Jossey-Bass.
Fredrickson, B.L. (2001), The role of positive emotions in positive
psychology The broaden-and-build theory of positive emotions.
American Psychologist, 56, 218-226.
Halbesleben, J.R.B., Wheeler, A.R. (2008), The relative roles of
engagement and embeddedness in predicting job performance and
intention to leave. Work and Stress, 22, 242-256.
Harter, J.K., Schmidt, F.L., Hayes, T.L. (2002), Business-unit-level
relationship between employee satisfaction, employee engagement,
and business outcomes A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 8(2), 268-279.
Heikkeri, E. (2010), Roots and consequences of the employee
disengagement phenomenon. Master Thesis, Saimaa University of
Applied Sciences Business Administration, Lappeenranta Degree
Programme in International Business Management.
Kahn, W.A. (1990), Psychological conditions of personal engagement
and disengagement at work. Academy of Management Journal,
33(4), 692-724.
Koodamara, N.K., Thomas, B., Kademani, P. (2016), Job satisfaction
and employee engagement as an antecedents of organizational
commitment. The International Journal of Humanities and Social
Studies, 4(10), 118-123.
Lawler, E.E., Hall, D.T. (1970), Relationships of job characteristics to
job involvement, satisfaction, and intrinsic motivation. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 54(4), 305-312.
Mark, C. (2012), Workplace Wrangler-Employees (Engaged or
Disengaged) Make or Break Your Business. Available from http
www.blog.seattlepi.comworkplacewrangler20121019employeesengaged-or-disengagedmake-or-break-your-business.
Saks, A.M. (2006), Antecedents and consequences of employee
engagement. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 21(7), 600-619.
Schaufeli, W.B., Bakker, A.B. (2004), Job demands, job resources, and
their relationship with burnout and engagement A multi-sample
study. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 25(3), 293-315.
Schaufeli, W.B., Salanova, M., Gonz’alez-Rom’a, V., Bakker, A.B.
(2002), The measurement of engagement and burnout Atwo sample
confirmatory factor analytic approach. Journal of Happiness Studies,
3, 71-92.
Stephin, J. G. (2011), 20 Signs of employees disengage. Available
from httpstephenjgill.typepad.comperformance_
improvement_b20111220-signs-of-employee-disengagement.html
Vajda, P.G., SpiritHeart. (2008), The thrill is gone - When employees
disengage. Available from httpwww.spiritheart.netmedia
the_thrill_is_gonewhen_employees_disengage.pdf.