Ghazzawi, Issam. (2015). Organizational Challenges and Failures: A theoretical Framework and a Proposed Model.. Journal of Strategic and International Studies.. • Ghazzawi, I. and Cook, T. (2015). Vol. X. 40-62. 

1
ORGANIZATION CHALLENGES AND FAILURES: A THEORITICAL FRAMEWORK
AND A PROPOSED MODEL*
Issam A. Ghazzawi, University of La Verne, California, USA
Tommy Cook, University of La Verne, California, USA
ABSTRACT
Companies’ failures are one of the most sought after subjects in today’s organizations. In
contrast to corporate fame and much publicized successes, this research focused on the reasons
for business failures by building on an extensive review of available literature on the subject
coupled with specific examples of known companies’ crisis that led to their decline. It argues
that leadership is in the center stage of any failure, rejuvenation, or success.
This paper proposes a conceptual framework to study and further explain why failure
occurs. It also adds to the literature of understanding the subject of organizational decline when
an organization fails to anticipate, recognize, avoid, perhaps neutralize, or even adapt to the
external or internal circumstances that threaten its long-term survival. This paper provides
implications for scholars and practicing mangers.
Keywords: Organizational failure, bankruptcy; failed companies; organizational challenges;
organizational decline and death; organizational dissolution; organizational rejuvenation.
1. INTRODUCTION
“Build it and they will come”! While this strategy may have worked for Ray Kinsella in the
movie the “Field of Dreams,” trying this in real life will more than likely be your first and final
mistake. For years, theorists, practitioners, and managers have tried to create a blueprint for an
effective and a well-managed organization that would fulfill the needs of its stakeholders.
Nevertheless, real-life organizations continuously make mistakes, some of which can and do lead
to organizational decline and eventual demise.
The mere essence of organizational failure that fuels the allure to succeed is and always
will be a subject of intrigue throughout organizations today and in the future. The flaws of
human nature will constantly be the energy that will keep theorist, researchers, and CEO’s ever
so busy to find solutions to limit the reasons for failure. However, breaking the reasons down by
various organizations and showing their particular challenges, opens up a wide area of study.
Organizations are characterized by variety of dysfunctional attributes that are associated
with conditions of organizational decline. Scholars have suggested individual level attributes
(Staw, Sandelands, & Dutton, 1981), group level (Krantz, 1985), and the organizational level
(Whetten, 1981). What constitutes an organizational failure is a subject for debate (Cameron,
Sutton, & Whetten, 1988; Mellahi & Wilkinson, 2004; Weitzel & Jonnsson 1989). In the absence

* Ghazzawi, I. and Cook, T. (2015). Organizational Challenges and Failures: A theoretical
Framework and a Proposed Model. Journal of Strategic and International Studies. Vol. X (2), 40-
62.
2
of such agreement between disciplines, various terms have been used interchangeably including
organizational decline, mortality, death, failure, exit, bankruptcy, retrenchment, and dissolution.
Cameron et al. (1988) defined organizational failure as “a deterioration in an
organization’s adaptation to its micro-niche and the associated reduction of resources within the
organization” (p. 9).
Having a successful organization is one thing, but knowing how to keep it going is the
real key to success. Organizations can do all the right things in the beginning but as quickly as
they have begun, their dream might turn into a nightmare. In any business, regardless of its type
and size; there is no substitute for good leadership, futuristic vision, good information, due
diligence, and team work to name a few important characteristics for success.
While organizational challenges and failures are inevitable in some instances, learning
from these major challenges and failures is important to organizational survival while their
course reversal is key to successful operations. Sitkin (1992), suggested that failure is important
to organizational learning and argued that it is more important than success itself. On the other
hand, Sheppard and Chowdhury (2005) argued that failure must be attributed to environmental
forces; it is the misalignment of the organization to its environment.
The purpose of this paper is to explore the subject of organizational challenges and
failure; and its importance to organizational learning and rejuvenation. Through its proposed
theoretical framework and literature review; the paper further sheds the light on why
organization’s failure to adequately manage its major functions (i.e. social, managerial, and
entrepreneurial) could lead to its decline and possible demise. The authors argued that leadership
role is central to any organizational rejuvenation or failure. This paper will use various real-life
examples of widely known organizations as a means to further explain the subject. A case-inpoint here; our use of the word “organization’s failure” does not necessarily mean its
death/bankruptcy. This study uses the modified five-stages of decline presented by the Weitzel
and Jonsson’s Model of Decline (Weitzel & Jonsson, 1989) to show the path each organization
entered into and how this lead to their demise.
2. THEORITICAL FOUNDATION OF THE STUDY
Organizations of all sizes are subject to challenges and failures. Global, giant organizations are
not immune. For instance, Sony Corporation’s new global president and chief executive officer
Kazuo Hirai’s and his management team turned around strategy is in limbo after the electronics
giant reported weak quarterly results and cut its profit forecast by 40% for 2013 (Osawa &
Inagaki, 2013). With a goal of making Sony as a clear number 3 smartphones maker behind
Samsung and Apple and helped by the strong demand in Japan and Europe in 2012- the year Mr.
Hirai assumed his job, Sony made progress towards this goal (Pfanner & Inagaki, 2014). In the
European arena, Sony benefited from a defunct partnership with Sweden’s Ericsson.
Accordingly, its global market share rose to 4.3% in 2012. Unfortunately for Sony, it slipped
back to 3.8% a year later and was positioned sixth instead. While customers moved to Sony
competitors and rating firms downgraded the company’s debt to junk staus, Mr. Hirai and other
executives lost their bonuses and took up to 50% annual pay cuts (Pfanner & Inagaki, 2014).
Five of Sony’s eight business segments recorded losses in the latest 2013 quarter. Its only
three profitable business segments were: Music, financial services, and devices that include
images for smart phones (Osawa & Inagaki, 2013). Additionally, Sony’s entertainment division
was accused by an activist investor, Daniel S. Loeb of lacking “discipline and accountability,”
3
and called for a spinoff of the Japanese electronics giant, demanding it publically list up to 20%
of the equity in its film and television studio and music label and publisher (Fritz, 2013). [Two
big-budget Sony Pictures films, “After Earth” and “White House Down,” flopped, over
shadowing the success of its television shows like “Breaking Bad” and “The Blacklist.”] (Fritz,
2013: B5).
While Sony snubbed Mr. Loeb’s call for a spinoff, it laid out plans to save $350 million
annually, shift attention from movies to television, agreed to improve performance in its film
industry, and to be more transparent (Fritz, 2013). According to Fritz (2013), “as Sony
Entertainment chief executive, Michael Lynton runs some of the best-performing divisions at
troubled Sony Corp., but 2013 may still go down as his annus horribilis (disastrous year)” (B5).
As one of the largest department store and e-commerce retailers in the US; J. C. Penney
Corp. operates some 1,100 J.C. Penney department stores in 49 states and Puerto Rico, and about
10 Foundry Big & Tall Supply Co. stores (Hoovers, 2014). In its bid to rejuvenate its aging
business, the company hired and has since fired Ron Johnson as its CEO, a former Apple stores
chief as consequences to disastrous results (Davidson, 2014; Hoover, 2014). J.C. Penney former
CEO Myron Ullman returned back to assume his past leadership role and undo the strategies
implemented by former CEO Ron Johnson “that included eliminating sales and promotions in
favor of everyday low prices” (Davidson, 2014:B1). The company announced it will close down
33 underperforming stores by May 2014 and lay-off 2,000 employees at a saving of about $65
million as a part of its turnaround strategy (Davidson, 2014). The decision to close stores came
after an analysis of store performance at the end of year (Kell, 2014).
According to Kapner and Prior (2014), “the department store is trying to claw its way
back from a disastrous overhaul that led to a 25% drop in sales and a $985 million loss a year
earlier” (B3). In fact, its CEO has quickly stabilized its financial condition and cash position. Its
prior sales decline has been detoured as a result of a few strategic decisions including: Dropping
some underperforming brands, bringing back popular in house brands, altering some brands
offering to ensure fewer items but more of them, and reverted to discounting (Kapner & Prior,
2014). In fact, Penny reported a profit of $35 million on its quarter ended February 1, 2014
compared with $552 million in loss a year earlier. Mr. Ullman stated, “Penny had completed the
first two phases of its turnaround-firming up relationships with suppliers, strengthening its
finances, and rebuilding its management team and product offerings. Now it is working on
refining its merchandise and marketing strategies” (Kapner & Prior, 2014: B3).
Highlighting the unfortunate demise of the many organizations that struggled to find the
perfect key to success and ultimately found them either struggling to survive or consequently
shutting their doors is where this research begins. Providing an in-depth look into the reasons for
failure will be the quest of this study so that others can adjust, conquer, and survive in the
increasingly competitive world in which we live. The importance of the steps to avoid that lead
to the downfall of organizational well-being are laid out in the following pages to offer
encouragement that there is a rewarding business life to be had after the doors have been opened.
Dan (2102) suggested that “immensely successful companies can become myopic and
product oriented instead of focusing on consumers’ needs. Kodak’s story of failing has its roots
in its success, which made it resistant to change. Its insular corporate culture believed that its
strength was in its brand and marketing, and it underestimated the threat of digital” (para .2).
While it has invented the first digital camera in 1975, Kodak, however did not market the new
digital technology out of fear that it might hurt its lucrative film business, even after digital
products were reshaping the market. This strategic failure was the direct cause of its decades-
4
long decline by not paying attention to the technology that it has invented and in-turn destroyed
its film-based business model (Dan, 2012; Mui, 2012).
Another classic example of organizational failure was the case of Quaker Oats acquisition
of Snapple, the non-carbonated fruit-flavored and iced tea drinks in the late 1994 for $1.7 billion.
It was clear to all but the CEO of Quaker Oats that far too much money was paid for this
acquisition, and as sales declined and losses mounted, Snapple was re-sold in 1997 for $300
million, a loss of $1.4 billion in only three years (Hartley, 2008).
Cannon and Edmondson (2001) argued that major and minor failures are often highly
related. They identified two capabilities to increase the chances of learning from failure. First,
organization members must be able and willing to take risks, implying that some activities might
fail. Second, they must be able to confront failure openly rather than covering it up. For instance,
Xerox Corporation, the world’s pioneer in imaging and printing was on the top of its industry
with its fast-rising earnings, superior technology, and a soaring stock price. However, in the early
1970s, the company became a victim of its own success; it needed to move beyond copying to
continue its growth. The company’s sales and earnings plunged as rivals caught up with Xerox’s
high-end digital machines. “The company’s stock fell from a high of $64 to less than $4, amid
fears that Xerox would file for federal bankruptcy protection. Over an 18-month period, Xerox
lost $38 billion in shareholders wealth” (Daft, 2013, p.3). While the company appeared destined
to fall, its problems were connected to series of strategic solutions and the company once gain
returned to the center of corporate admiration (Daft, 2013).
A key important factor in the success of any organization is relevant to its ability to adapt
to change in every aspect-changing membership, changing leadership, and changing conditions
to meet the new demands and stay in focus. Komives, Lucas, and Mcmahon (2013) argued that
the ability to adapt by the organization enables it to renew itself and becomes vibrant.
The problem of decline is widely studied and constantly examined (Cameron, Whetten &
Kim, 1987; Fernando et al., 2013; Heine & Rindfleisch, 2013; Levine, 1978). Walonick (1993)
would contend that clear and concise perceptions of the definition of organizational decline does
not exist as is evidence in the multitude of research from many scholarly men and women yet a
common and simplistic definition of decline is a decrease in profit or budget. Most agree that the
impact that it has on individuals and the business overall is negative. Cameron, Whetten and Kim
(1987) therefore argue that Organizational Dysfunctions of Decline as presented in the “dirty
dozen” lists innovation curtailed, decreasing morale, across-the-board cuts, increasing conflict,
lack of teamwork under centralization and short-term crisis mindset, resistance to change,
politicized interest groups, loss of trust, reduced communication, and lack of leadership.
Based on that, streamlining a definition will be extremely difficult as “we are dealing
with empirical phenomena and the world has an uncomfortable way of not permitting itself to be
fitted into clean classifications” (Simon & March as quoted in Jaffee, 2001). Accordingly, the
author’s approach is to link the subject matter to organizational challenges and failures and
attempt to explain such phenomena through the available theories. These major challenges and
failures will serve as a theoretical foundation of this paper. In this paper we argue that a failing
organization goes through a model of organizational failure that could result in a possible reverse
or eventual death. The specific contribution of this paper is to suggest a systematic study for
current failure as a mean to prevent future occurrences. Additionally, it seeks to suggest a new
model of studying an organizational decline and failure that centered on leadership.
While emphasizing the importance of the role of leadership, the individuals at the helm
cannot demise the constant changes taking place within the environment of the industry they are
5
operating in. Actions of leadership that are dictated by capricious movements that are often times
quick and devastating, can either take an organization in a downward spiral. These actions are
the seeds of change that provide healthy financial growth in the upcoming years of the change
that is taking place (Lee, et al., 2014). A leader plays many roles and one resembles the skills of
a meteorologist. Forecasting a turbulent condition so that the necessary precautions are
implemented is vital to the continued growth and prosperity of the company. Failure to foresee
the future and furthermore failure to act upon the data given by economic business forecast
specialist leads many companies to the brink of failure (Stuart, 2006).
3. ORGANIZATIONAL FAILURE AND REJUVENATION: A PROPOSED
FRAMEWORK
Learning from failures is a key to organizational rejuvenation. It does involve skills, systems,
and capabilities (Sheppard & Chowdhury, 2005). Rejuvenation, result from making and
achieving a series of 'holistic' changes in the organization’s structure, its systems, its processes,
and strategy that affects the entire organization (Stopford & Baden-Fuller, 1990). In addition to
that, this article argues that leadership behavior and activities/behavior enable rejuvenation and
provides possibilities for continuous knowledge exploitation. Contrary to that, the lack of
leadership disabled the organization. Accordingly, organizational turnaround and rejuvenation
does involve leadership who are capable to learn, willing to enable organizational learning from
failures, and able to enhance organizational capacities to adapt to environmental jolts and
turbulence (Carmeli & Sheaffer, 2008).
3.1. The Major Functions of the Organization
It has been suggested that firms perform three major functions-namely: (1) The social function,
(2) the managerial function, and (3) the entrepreneurial function (Mourdoukoutas, 2011).
Organizational social function pertains to its very existence as a social institution with the
purpose of serving its customers and other organizational social responsibilities and needs; and
the provision of employment and income for labor. On the other hand, while it’s managerial
function determines how economic resources should be allocated and how different tasks must
be performed; the entrepreneurial function of the firm focuses on the discovery and exploitation
of new business opportunities (Mourdoukoutas, 2011; Gottardo and Moisello, 2011); it is the
most important function, as it drives innovation, sustains the firm and keeps it viable. An
organization needs key individual(s) and organizational entrepreneurial capabilities that enable it
to be competitive. Thus, the aforementioned three functions are interrelated. The social function,
for instance, impacts and imposes various constraints on the entrepreneurial and managerial
functions. On the other hand, the entrepreneurial and the managerial functions impose their own
constraints on the social function. Accordingly, a failure in any of these three functions
negatively affects the other two functions. If said failure goes unchecked, it can lead to
organizational decline and eventual demise of the organization (Mourdoukoutas, 2011).
3.2. The Role of Leadership in Organizational Rejuvenation
Having a strategic leadership that is concerned with managing the strategic decisions leading to
the wealth-creation process to its shareholders and owners as a result of an enhanced
organizational performance has always been an organization’s priority (Hill & Jones; Rowe,
2001). Strategic leadership is defined as “the ability to influence others to voluntarily make day-
6
to-day decisions that enhance the long-term viability of the organization, while at the same time
maintaining its short-term financial stability” (Rowe, 2001:81). It is concerned with creating and
sustaining the organization’s competitive advantage, “task of managing an overall enterprise and
influencing key organizational outcomes” (Carpenter & Sanders, 2009:33). Please refer to Figure
1 for illustration of this relationship.
As strategic leadership premise is focused on ensuring the organization’s long-term
perspective, it involves vision, meaning that leaders are future-oriented individuals.
Organizational failures are often attributed to leaders (Giessner & Van Kneppenber,
2008; Lord et al., 1978; Meindl & Ehrlich, 1987). In the presence of the evidence that failures
are attributed to leadership, to achieve organizational goals and in instances to
turnaround/rejuvenate their organizations; leaders inevitably have to deal with failures (Lord et
al., 1978; Meind1 & Ehrlich, 1987). Probst and Raisch (2005) in their analysis of the 100 largest
organizational crises over a five year period have identified leadership as one of the major
problem areas in organizational crises in addition to growth, change, and culture. The authors
like to re-affirm that leadership could influence growth, change, and organizational culture.
Accordingly, it is the most important organizational variable that could enhance organizational
prospective and rejuvenates it in instances. It could also conversely age prematurely and fail in
the absence of strategic leadership. A case-in point, leadership is the center of all of the
organizational functions (i.e. entrepreneurial, managerial, and social). While a success on all of
these functions, lead to organizational success, the inability to get relevant information and lead
through all of these aforementioned functions lead to organizational jolts that could lead to
dissolution if no appropriate action is carried out.
FIGURE 1: MAJOR ORGANIZATIONAL FUNCTIONS
Stages in repositioning of an organization for the purpose of a successful turnaround due to
failed policies by organizations include competent leadership evaluation and assessment.
Leadership abilities should instinctively be alerted to the acute needs stage, restructuring stage,
stabilization stage, and the revitalization stage which is identified in turnaround management.
Turnaround management is a process dedicated to corporate renewal and emulates in theory
The Entrepreneurial
Function
The Social
Function
The Managerial
Function
Leadership &
Information
7
from other models defining various needs in businesses to escape failure (Harker & Harker,
1998).
3.3. Organizational Decline and Failure
The cause and effect of the dereliction will be explained through the five stages of decline
presented by the Weitzel and Jonsson’s Model of Decline (Weitzel & Jonsson, 1989). The
authors proposed the injection of leadership in each stage of the model as shown in Figure 2 out
of a belief in its importance for organizational rejuvenation or dissolution.
According to Weitzel and Jonsson (1989), the gradual sinking and wasting away of many
organizations starts with being blinded to the internal or external problems, that impend their
long-term survival (blinded stage). In an attempt to reverse decline, management has to gather
relevant information to enable it take the right action. With glaring evidence to the signs of poor
management, organizations fail to decide on corrective action that leads to a significant decline
in performance (inaction stage). To correct its path, management has to prompt an action. Once
management realizes there is a problem, a possible faulty decision or a faulty solution
implementation has taken place; could lead to a fact that the change does not meet the needs to
appropriately address the problems being faced that could lead to steepening
performance/organizational decline (faulty action). In this stage, management has to correct its
action to reverse its declination.
Invariably as stages 1-3 have taken its toll on the company it becomes evident that
extreme measures must be taken to prevent the decline from going any further. Organization is
given its last chance for reversal (crisis stage). In this stage organizations have to restructure or
reorganize. Very importantly, a change in leadership is vital. Having experienced all of these
stages, organizations reach inability to survive and in the end they cease to exist; given a hostile
environment, organizations face quick demise (dissolution stage). In this stage, organizations
have no choice.
It is important to note that not all organizations go through all the stages in this model.
One can either avoid a step and still get to the conclusion of dissolution or escape stage five
altogether and rebound before it’s too late. Weitzel and Jonsson (1989) are aware that their
model is based on a long-term process that leads an organization through each step. Alternative
ways of providing fundamental and responsible action are not given to alert management to
problems which propose a weakness to this model, yet its overall hypothesis is solid.
Investigating the presence of dysfunctional inherent characteristics associated with the reasons of
decline and filling in the gaps lying between each of the steps with generality will be presented
in each case offered in this study. Please see Figure 2 for a suggested modified model of
organizational decline stages. According to this model, leadership is the heart of organization
success or failure. Its ability to gather information, to prompt action, to correct action when
necessary is very important to organization growth, sustainability, and rejuvenation in instances.
On the other hand, the lack of leadership results in crisis and dissolution.
4. THE ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES OF CORPORATE CHALLENGES AND
FAILURES
In order to clarify how the proposed model works, this paper provides real-life examples of
iconic organizations that once upon a time were very successful and struggled. Some came back
8
strong while others failed. This paper sheds the light on Borders Group, Inc., Circuit City,
Eastman Kodak, Fisker Automotive, J.C. Penney, and Quiznos.
FIGURE 2: A SUGGESTED MODIFIED MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL DECLINE
STAGES
SS
F
Source: This is a modified model that is based on William Weitzel and Ellen Jonsson (1989).
Decline in Organizations: A Literature Integration and Extension, Administrative Science
Quarterly. Vol. 34, pp. 99-109.
4.1. Borders Group, Inc.
The brothers Tom and Louis Border didn’t just open a book store in 1971; they have created a
metropolitan way of developing an inventory system. It involved a management system that
incorporated a mainframe punch card placed in each book so that they could stay in touch with
the comings and goings of each one so that they could adjust their inventory to getting closer to
the actual time of the live transactions as they occur. This system which was called “Expert” led
to the acquisition of Borders in 1992 by Kmart. The problem that arose was due to the two
brothers’ exit which left others to deal with an IT management system that had flaws that needed
to be addressed (Hayes, 2011; Hofman, 2002; Zellar, 2001).
Problems with this system were that it couldn’t keep up with their growth. The system
worked well in the early time, however as their growth increased within Borders stores as well as
1,100 stores in the Waldenbooks branch; problems with this system became increasing evident.
Borders did try to replace “Expert” but the results that keep coming back were nothing new
(Hayes, 2011; Zellar, 2001).
Blinded Stage Strategic
Leadership
Success
Strategic
Leadership Failure
Inaction Stage
Faulty Action Stage
Unsuccessful
Organizational
Performance
Successful
Organizational
Performance
Crisis Stage
Dissolution Stage
Good information
Prompt action
Correct action
Effective reorganization
No choices available
9
By February 2011 the Ann Arbor bookseller Borders Group Inc. was on the ropes.
Analysts point to a series of strategic errors that never achieved market leadership: when the
competition was into superstores, Borders Group never transitioned from its mall stores. When
competition moved online, Borders worked on improving bricks-and-mortar revenue (Duggan,
2011).
Border’s CD sales strategy was implemented at the time when the media format was
transitioning to digital. When Barnes & Noble Inc. and Amazon.com introduced e-readers,
Borders Group continued to implement books sales through its just immerging website (Duggan,
2011). Borders embraced a system called "category management," which divides its books into
250 categories and anoints one publisher to serve as "captain" of each. Being captain means you
finance and partner in market research. The expense of this venture was not an easy pill for
publishers to swallow, but allowed these big category captains the perk of using their position to
edge aside the competition. Category captains had to pay fees as high as $100,000 going to
training and research and realized an increased shelf space and other advantages. This meant that
only the larger publishers could afford such ventures and would promote the need for further
consolidation later on. None of the above took the company any further into making books more
available, making price more competitive or providing faster delivery (Akst, 2000).
By its own admission that massive superstores have lost much of their appeal, Borders
continued to open superstores at a rapid clip. With increased competition from the Internet and
from unconventional booksellers like Home Depot, Barnes & Noble embarked on a strategy to
close its mall stores, terminating its last store in 2011 (Publishers Weekly, 2006). Meanwhile,
Borders focused on necessary improvements to its merchandising system in the retail locations
under Waldenbooks or Borders Express. It had on-going problems with its Retek merchandising
system, an antiquated system already overwhelmed by high volume of transactions that was
affecting sales at Waldenbooks (Publishers Weekly, 2006).
Music sales were declining in the 464 Borders superstores, but the company was adding
music to its Borders Express concept, which is the company's mall-based store, despite slow foot
traffic and continued problems in the media business. Sales of music have been a major trouble
spot for Borders, and Prudential notes that Borders's repositioning efforts were not to be taking
hold as the company implemented plans for Express stores to carry the top 50 music titles
(Milliot, 2005).
Compared with other booksellers on the Web, Borders was in the “slow lane”. Its view of
the Internet was that dot.com business that suffocates profits. Borders continued to believe that
successful bookselling was through retail stores (Muller, 2000). And it wasn’t until 1998 as it
became clear that online book retailing was changing the bookselling business; Borders finally
launched its e-commerce site, several years after Amazon.com launched and its rival Barnes &
Noble.com. However, “after their initial e-retail efforts resulted in losses for investors, Borders
scrapped its website. Due to less-than-expected profits overall, some of the bookseller's private
equity investors agitated about poor decisions and poor management and in 2001 DiRomualdo
was replaced as CEO” (Peterson, 2014: 2).
Borders.com failed to draw from the Web ideas of Amazon the same way their
competitor Barnes and Noble has done. Borders once again lagged behind while Barnes and
Noble took advantage of Amazons Web ideas and made it work for them. Border eventually lost
its online presence. In 2001 there was talk of an Amazon-Borders deal but Amazon wasn’t
interested in getting involved with the brick-and-mortar business and so the deal folded. Relying
on the advice of analysts proved to be disastrous (Hayes, 2011; Reid, 2011). By 2008, when
10
Borders re-entered its own online sales operation again, it had lost years of website opportunities
that would make its operation profitable (Peterson, 2014). Accordingly, it had lost years of
website opportunities that would make its operation profitable. And while Borders was busy
building up its own e-commerce site, its competitors were implementing e-reader strategies.
Even given the difficult economic climate, Borders losses underscore how difficult brick-andmortar book retailers are finding it to compete for customers at a time when online retail rivals
offering significant discounts on hot new hardcover best sellers and selling new best sellers for
only $9.99 in the electronic-book format as loss leaders (Trachtenberg, 2010). E-books came on
the scene as Amazon presented the Kindle and Barnes and Noble created the Nook. Borders
didn’t have the vision to come up with their own e-reader that they could call their own; and so
they found themselves once again trailing their competition. Borders’ decline was in part due to
don’t acting more aggressively of pursing sales of digital books. At one time Borders was
banking heavily on what they were doing at the time concerning their digital book downloads for
a competitive edge, but it never surfaced. Sticking to saving money by selling e-book readers
from Sony, Kobo and Velocity they lost their presence in their industry (Hayes, 2011; Panaritis,
2011; Zellar, 2001).
Borders, who always prided itself on above-average service, believed customer loyalty
would prevail in their timing for an e-commerce website. But it let Amazon.com get a three-year
head start before introducing its own Internet book-selling site. When Borders.com finally
arrived, many of its best applications in selling books, music and video were quickly replicated
by rivals that had a head start (Reilly, 1999).
Unable to keep up with its competitors in the aggressive e-book market and losing online
business to web-savvier brands like Amazon and B&N, Borders had to file for Chapter 11
bankruptcy protection. When the bankruptcy papers went through, Borders owed over $270
million to its creditors, including every major publishing house in the business; but for the
everyday consumer, the chain closing feels like just another casualty in the long and drawn-out
decline of the paper-book market at large (Syme, 2011). In the absence of bidders, Borders
Group announced on July 18, 2011 that the company would sell to liquidators Hilco Merchant
Resource and Gordon Brothers Group, will close the remaining 399 stores, and layoff the
approximately 10,700 employees by September 2011 (Peterson, 2014).
4.2. Circuit City
In his book “Good to Great”, Jim Collins featured Circuit City Stores, Inc. as one of only handful
of publicly held fortune 500 companies to make his list of business enterprises that transitioned
from good to great (Price, 2001). While it was hailed as a shining example of exceptional
management practices, cracks started to show in its foundation (Wulf, 2011). The company’s
story started in 1949, when Sam Wurtzel opened his small TV store in Richmond, VA, after he
learned that the South’s first television station was going on the air. Over the next 20 years, Sam
grew his company into a 100-store chain. In 1972, his son “Alan” became its CEO and created
the superstore concept that evolved into Circuit City. By 2000, Circuit City was a Fortune 500
company with over 600 stores and 60,000 employees (Wulf, 2011). For its first 50 years, the
original company named “Wards TV” was a pioneer in the rapidly changing consumer
electronics industry by focusing on customer service and savings; having what was known as the
best-trained sales consultants in the industry; and an excellent career development opportunities
and programs that helped the company grew from a dozen superstores to more than 600 in a
period of 15 years (Wulf, 2011).
11
While Circuit City’s earnings and stock price were at their all-time high in 2000, its
archrival, Best Buy’s earnings were higher, and it was also beating Circuit City in every category
whether total sales, market share, or profit per store (Romero, 2013). Under CEO Alan
McCollough, the company began making changes, but the moves appeared to backfire. For
instance, in 2001, with a belief that appliances were expensive to move and store, and that
getting rid of them will freed up space for new products; Circuit stopped selling appliances,
which made up between 10 percent and 15 percent of the business and that resulted in Circuit
City missing out on the residential real estate boom, when appliance sales soared (Romero,
2013).
In February, 2003 Circuit City announced cutbacks of its workforce, including the
dismissal of approximately 3900 commissioned salespeople (approximately 60%), moving its
sales force to an hourly wage, and the shuttering of 10 repair centers (Romero, 2013; Willis,
2003). This move according to its CEO Alan McCollough, will save the company about $130
million in payroll costs and will help offset an expected $40 million drop in earnings caused by
severance pay and charges (Willis, 2003). According to Tejada and McWilliams (2003), this
move which some still call "Bloody Wednesday", sales personnel across the nation waited to
hear their fate from managers.
Under Schoonover's leadership who took over the job in March 2006, company’s
performance has been dismal. The company has posted net losses every quarter. That follows a
$12 million net loss in its fiscal year that ended Feb. 28, 2007 (Gogoi, 2008). Since he took over
the top job in March, 2006, he promised plans to relocate underperforming stores and improve
customer service, which seemed to give a lift to the company in the first few months. But two
years later, plans to overhaul the electronics giant were not sound (Gogoi, 2008).
In March 2007, concerned by on-going decline in profitability, new CEO Philip
Schoonover announced plans to lay off its high paid commissioned sales force, replacing them
with lower wage employees. Accordingly, he fired 3,400 of its highest paid, and presumably its
best qualified and performing employees (Bogoslaw, 2007; Gogoi, 2008). He was later heard
saying that these employees interacting with customers weren’t really that important, they do not
add value. But in so doing, Circuit City dismissed its most experienced personnel, who knew the
importance of product knowledge and customer service to achieve the commissioned wage
desired. The restructuring in favor of lower paid ones, intern, led to substantial deterioration in
customer service and may have contributed to poor TV sales that year, when flat-panel television
sales were a large part of the business (Bogoslaw, 2007; Gogoi, 2008). In addition to Best Buy,
Circuit City was also facing fierce competition from the likes of Wal-Mart and Target, as well as
from warehouse clubs such as Costco, Sam's Club, and BJ Wholesale (Bogoslaw, 2007).
According to Gogoi (2007), “analysts say the move led to a devastating loss of morale
and a decline in customer service… Circuit City's stock, trading at $4.50, has declined 77% …
Despite annual sales of $12 billion, making it a ripe target for shareholder actions, as big
investors can buy huge chunks of stock on the cheap” (para. 4 &5). Perhaps one of its most
damaging decisions was its series of stock buybacks. Circuit City had a lot of cash as a result of
spinning off CarMax in 2002 and selling a private-label credit card bank in 2003 (Romero,
2013). Under pressure from shareholders, the company spent almost $1 billion between 2003 and
2007 buying back stock at an average of $20 per share when in fact the stock was worth only
$4.20 per share by the end of 2007. Accordingly, said purchases couldn’t offset the fact that
Circuit City’s business was failing, and the company is also stripped off cash needed (Romero,
2013). On November 3, 2008, Circuit City announced that it would close 155 stores and layoff
12
17 percent of its workforce by year-end. On November 10, 2008, Circuit City filed for Chapter
11 bankruptcy protection (Hart et al., 2012; Popken, 2008; Romero, 2013). On January 16, 2009,
Circuit City announced its plans to liquidate and filed chapter 7.
4.3. Eastman Kodak
In 1884, the Gilded Age capitalist and founder of the Eastman Kodak film-making company
known by George Eastman started a company that would eventually employ 60,000 employees
and control 89% of the United States’ inextinguishable demand that made Kodak’s possible
(Bethune, 2013).
According to Rochester Business Journal (2012), Eastman developed a method for dryplate photography, and established the Eastman Dry Plate and Film Company. Within a few
years, a small, easy-to-use device that was loaded with enough film for 100 pictures was
introduced. The camera was mailed to the company, which was returned with pictures and film.
From that time on, Kodak continued to dominate the photography industry introducing
Kodachrome in 1935 and a handheld movie camera in 1951 and establishing US plants to
produce the chemicals, plastics, and fibers used in its film production (Bethune, 2013).
The innovations continued with the 1963 launch of the Instamatic, which became
Kodak's biggest success with a mistake-proof film cartridge. By 1976 Kodak had sold an
estimated 60 million Instamatics, 50 million more cameras than all its competitors combined.
The Kodak instant camera (1976) and the unsuccessful disc camera (1982) followed. In the
1980s Kodak was diversifying into electronic publishing, batteries, Verbatim floppy disks (in
1985, sold 1990), Sterling Drug pharmaceuticals (sold 1994), and L&F Products do-it-yourself,
household products (sold 1994). In 1992 Kodak developed the Advanced Photography System in
a joint R&D project with four Japanese photo giants - Canon, Nikon, Minolta, and Fuji Photo
Film. The company also introduced the Photo CD for storing photographs the same year
(Rochester Business Journal, 2012).
George Fisher became Kodak's chairman and CEO in 1993. To help finance Kodak’s
advances, Fisher began cutting debt by selling non-core assets. He sold off Eastman Chemical in
1994 and Kodak’s copier sales and services business in 1996 and nearly $1.5 billion was
reported in write offs related to employee layoffs. Implementing his digital leadership strategy,
Fisher acquired the document management operations from Wang Laboratories (Getronics) and
expanded digital offerings with Intel and Adobe Systems. Kodak PC allowed consumers to
modify, print, and send personal photos from their PCs. Kodak had acquired the medical imaging
business of Imation, but needed to unload more of its non-core operations to do so, including Fox
Photo’s 450-store chain (Waters, 1999).
By 1999, it was apparent that Fisher's efforts to position Kodak into the new digital era
was not yielding quick results. Fisher was coming up short in its goal to cut costs in the final
months of 1999, providing the immediate cause for sell-off and a major set-back in efforts to turn
around one of America's best-known companies. The Russian collapse and downturns in Asia
and Latin America economies were declared as reasons for the 15% drop in sales volumes in the
latest quarter of the year (Waters, 1999).
But then early this century, this giant started to come apart. Failure to strive to stay in
touch with the movement within their industry led to purposeless factories being built and thus
the evidence of suicide emerged. This bizarre and unfortunate departure from greatness had an
eerie resemblance to George Eastman’s suicide in 1932 as a result of a painful spinal disorder
(Bethune, 2013). The working which figuratively and literally operated in a chemical-protecting
blackout of the film trade while it was concealed in darkness were now abandoned or slated for
13
destruction. Experiencing the death of one of the Kodak plants in Chalon-sur-Saone, France
which happens to be where photography had its beginnings was just one of the many that used
up its purposefulness. The digital age was here and Kodak failed to accept its presence (Bethune,
2013; Randall, 2011).
Daniel Carp replaced Fisher as CEO in early 2000. Carp formed a joint venture with
computer giant Hewlett-Packard to develop digital photofinishing equipment, while extending its
online photo business with the purchase of PictureVision, a digital image storage service and
acquiring Lumisys, medical digital imaging systems (Tsao, 2001). The company completed its
acquisition of Bell & Howell's ProQuest imaging operations. By the end of 2001 Kodak had
acquired Ofoto, later known as Kodak Imaging Network that provided EasyShare Gallery, online
photo albums that friends and families can view and download. Carp was taking Kodak through
yet another restructuring which gained shareholder confidence but with caution. That's a sign the
company is being hurt by lower film sales caused in part by the sharp slowdown in travel and in
the economy generally in the wake of the September 11 attacks. Adding to the woes is pricing
pressure on Kodak's health-imaging business, which makes X-ray chemicals and film, as well as
digital laser printers to process X-rays (Tsao, 2001).
Now the company’s infrastructure consisted of a three core front - photography,
including professional and consumer photo; commercial imaging, including graphics and
commercial printing; and components, such as the flat-panel display technology used in cell
phones. Kodak’s health-imaging group and entertainment-imaging unit, which make movie film,
remained the number 1 in the traditional film business (Tsao, 2001).
Thanks to its new digital offerings, struggling Kodak was suddenly looking awfully
sharp. EasyShare sales clearly boosted Kodak's market standing. If the trend holds, Kodak will
surely gain swiftly on Sony, which had 25% of the digital market in 2001, compared
to Kodak's 14% share, according to International Data Corp. The company relies heavily on sales
of traditional film to consumers, a business that has been hit hard by both the recession and
September 11, as well as the shift to digital photography. Consumers last year cut back sharply
on the use of traditional film (Smith & Kennan, 2002). Kodak avoided the intensely competitive
home printer market, pushing 24,000 printing kiosks in retail stores such as CVS and Kmart.
Add it all up, and as big a success as Kodak's EasyShare cameras are, they may not be enough
(Smith & Kennan, 2002).
Further hits to the economy and dropping revenue prompted management in 2001 to
eliminate regional divisions and realign the business along product lines. In December, Kodak
and SANYO Electric Co. announced the formation of a business venture to manufacture OLED
displays for cameras, PDAs, and other devices. In 2001, Kodak renewed a multi-year agreement
as the exclusive imaging supplier of film and related products for The Walt Disney Company
(Smith & Kennan, 2002).
In April 2003 Antonio Perez was named president and COO, and in June, Kodak closed
its only single-use camera factory in the US and shifted operations overseas. Kodak purchased
Practiceworks, a dental imaging and software business and announced it would cut as many as
6,000 jobs worldwide. This came after reducing as many as 2,200 jobs in the US and Europe
earlier in the year and cutting as many as 7,000 jobs worldwide. Kodak purchased LaserPacific
Media Corporation, which provides post production film editing and processing for television,
video, and motion pictures. It also purchased Algotec Systems; a developer of advanced picture
archiving and communications systems (Gibbs, 2003). All the while, profits were getting crushed
14
by the global tourism slump. Now the Dow's hottest performer in 2002 is down 20% this year to
a recent $27 (Gibbs, 2003).
Once a photography legend, this 125-year-old institution was sidetracked by the
emergence of digital technology. Kodak’s disruptive technology was literally burying them as
they continued to operate with film and push aside the new age of capturing images in files.
Kodak had been so powerful that they failed to think that what they were doing couldn’t be
upended. In the United States they once captured almost 90% share of all photographic film
sales. But despite the clear evidence that the digital era was here they chose to stay steady with
their business model that was their legacy (Burritt, 2011; Bussey, 2012; Randall, 2011). How
Kodak could have overlooked this movement eludes many. Some say it is a combination of lack
of imagination, being entrenched in convictions and narrow-minded thinking, and restricting too
far that caused their problems. Having ceded to their competitors was apparent as they faded
further behind Nikon, Sony, Samsung, Olympus, and Canon (Castelluccio, 2013).
Kodak’s lack of creativity, restructuring too far, and holding on to their old ways of
thinking all contributed to their failures. Where globalization has changed the way businesses
perform so has the Kodak been left in the dark as they found bankruptcy as their only alternative
to surviving for another day. It’s ironic that Kodak claims to have invented digital photography
because it is one thing that brought them down. The problem was that they looked the other way
as their competitors such as Nikon, Sony, and Canon picked up on the technology and developed
it (Burritt, 2011; Bussey, 2012).
Coupled with the uncertain economic recovery, lingering housing slump, and gyrating
stock market, Kodak found itself in troubling times. It was burning through the cash that could
have been spent to reinvent the business. To try and ease the pain, Perez made a choice to put
1,100 of the company’s patents on the block in an attempt to raise as much as $3 billion (Bussey,
2012).
Kodak reports $189 M for the second quarter of 2009 due to the 29% drop in its sales,
attributing the decline in sales to the decreasing demand for digital cameras, traditional film and
commercial-printing supplies because of the recession. One of the cost cutting measures
employed by the firm includes the reduction of research and development costs by 38% to 84
million dollars in the period (Bulkeley, 2009). What’s interesting is that while Kodak invented
the first digital camera in 1975, it was Sony who first introduced a digital camera to the people in
the form of the Sony Mavica in 1981 (Crook, 2012).
Due to headwinds, Kodak had to shore up depleting revenues. They attempted this by
pitching their phone and camera makers to pay to use their patents. With cash revenues falling
approximately 25% to $957 million they felt they had no other option. Ultimately the companies
refused and Kodak sued them to make them comply. Heading into its sixth annual loss in seven
years and the fact that its stock fell nearly a whopping 90% Kodak must focus their efforts to
survive. It may take several years to regroup and match the operating profit margins it had
enjoyed in the late ‘90s but the CEO is optimistic that it will happen. Their immediate dilemma
is that their commercial printers and digital consumer products are not covering the losses in
their film business (Atkinson, 2012; Burritt, 2011).
A dramatic collapse in licensing revenues at Kodak's Consumer Digital Imaging division
and a doubling of losses at its Graphic Communications Group wing helped propel the firm into
Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. U.S. sales at its consumer business halved to dollars 864m
and were down 36% overall worldwide at $1.7 billion (Francis, 2012). The previously profitable
division went into reverse by more than half a billion dollars, moving from a $278m profit in
15
2010 to a $349 million loss in 2011. Sell off a raft of its digital imaging patents stalled in the runup to Chapter 11 due to legal technicalities, including ongoing patent infringement claims against
Apple and RIM. Losses at Kodak's Graphic Communications Group doubled to $191m, on sales
that nudged up 2% to $2.7bn. Gross profits fell 19%, which Kodak blamed on industry price
competition. The only part of Kodak to post a profit was its Film, Photofinishing and
Entertainment Group, where profits fell by 63% to $34 million from a sales decrease of 12%,
valued at $1.5 billion (Francis, 2012).
4.4. Fisker Automotive
This green automotive company which produced a plug-in luxury car that had a base price of
around $100,000 is in trouble. Fisker's Karma was designed to be a high-performance, luxury,
electric plug-in that would deliver the equivalent of 52 mile per gallon. Leonardo DiCaprio and
Clooney were owners of what was being talked about as the most beautiful car ever. The crushed
glass coated paint job made it sparkle. Even with the governments backing and $1 billion from
private investors the Karma could not keep its wheels on the road. By 2012 Karma had received
a failing grade from the Consumer Reports (Krisher, 2013). It had many production problems.
The display panel was awful, the radio worked part-time and in the end they only sold
approximately 2000 cars. Fisker had that second model in the hopper but it never made it to the
production lines. When the Energy Department withdrew their funding after it had already took
$192 million of the initial half a billion dollar loan, it soon filed bankruptcy (Krisher, 2013;
Vaughn, 2013).
Its second model, which was supposed to revive a shuttered GM factory in Delaware, was
never built. The Energy Department cut Fisker off after it drew down just $193 million of a halfbillion-dollar loan. Fisker’s success was also dependent on its ability to become a tech outfit and
auto manufacture. An analyst at a securities company agreed that they failed at both. The legacy
that they will leave behind is the harm they caused to other electric vehicles that are looking for
support from the federal government. With billions of funds set aside for green car initiatives
from programs such as the Loan Guarantee Program and the Advanced Technology Vehicles
Manufacturing Loan Program the Department of Energy will be taking second looks at dishing
out their funds (Krisher, 2013; Vaughn, 2013).
Drastically underestimating the challenge of mass-producing vehicles for the market was
a failure by Fisker as well as their investors. By 2012 they had sold fewer than 900 Karmas
which was a far cry from the expected 100,000 cars they were supposed to sell by their third year
of production (Krisher, 2013; Vaughn, 2013). Fisker discontinued building their vehicle due to
battery-supply issues just to name one of the many problems they had to deal with. Other issues
included legal, supplier issues and some would say just bad luck (Krisher, 2013; Vaughn, 2013).
Relying on engineering contractors rather than their in-house personnel design flaws
were made, it became obvious that Fisker didn’t have a good business model. The rush to bring
the car to the market was a big mistake. One of problems caused by rushing things was not
taking the time to obtain a good battery for the car. The one they settled on had a habit of
catching on fire. The company they used went bankrupt as well. Going with this battery called
A123 would prove to be their fatal mistake. Their main supplier of these batteries also filed for
bankruptcy. Then there was the disastrous storm that demolished 338 automobiles while still in
storage. The battery technology is paramount concerning the cost competitiveness of electric and
hybrid vehicles. Getting in business with an unproven manufacturer of batteries of this type was
fatal. Karma’s high base price and faulty manufacturing couldn’t bear scrutiny to the aspirations
16
they had of producing a hybrid, clean-tech sedan with superb luxury qualities. The fate on Fisker
was riding on its ability to excel as a tech outfit and show that it belonged among the industry of
automobile manufactures. Unfortunately it didn’t live up to either of these and instead descended
to throes of death (Krisher, 2013; Shufelt, 2013; Vaughn, 2013).
The company’s assets were acquired in early 2014 by China's biggest auto parts supplier,
Wanxiang Group, for $149.2 million in a U.S. bankruptcy auction (Fox News, 2014). Owned by
billionaire Lu Guanqiu, Mr. Guanqiu “has aspired to get into the auto industry since the 1980s
and the electric-car business for roughly 15 years (Fox News, 2014, Para. 4). Outbidding at least
one other Chinese investor, Guanqiu told Bloomberg BusinessWeek: “I will put every cent that
Wanxiang makes into making electric vehicles… I will burn as much cash as it takes to succeed”
(Fox News, 2014: Para. 7).
4.5. JC Penney Co. Inc. (NYSE: JCP)
This troubled U. S. chain over a century old is scrambling to accept the reality that department
stores dominance are a shadow of the past. As reported in the year 2000 Penney’s income was
$11 million. That computes to one cent per share. This is compared to a year earlier where the
figure was at $112 million, or 40 cents per share (Zimmerman, 2000). First Call/Thomson
Financial remarked that Penney would break even. In the fourth quarter of 2012 they reported a
loss totaling $87 million ($0.41 per share) which included restructuring and management
transition charges. Included in this was the financial impact caused by the new pricing and
promotion strategy they had pursued (PR Newswire, 2012). In 2012 the company posted a loss
of $985 million U.S. dollars. This was coupled with more than half of its market value erased. In
one quarter in 2013 same-store sales fell by 32%. Their Eckerd drugstores were having a similar
fate as their operating profit dropped from $76 million to $2 million. Sales at some stores
dropped 1.5%, and catalog sales increased 1.5% (Orovic, 2012).
The CEO Ron Johnson that was brought in to save the company from ruin, with his
distinctly 21st century initiatives eventually would be replaced by the same man that he initially
replaced in 2011 (Castaldo, 2013). One of Johnson’s initiatives included replacing cent figures
with double zeroes on all price tags. This was a part of his new pricing strategy and his attempt
to turning the store into an atmosphere of “Town Square” destination. Some companies know
when to drop a bad idea before it takes you further down but Ron failed to realize his mistakes
(Orovic, 2012). As of 2013 JC Penney’s Canadian market is being looked at as the one that can
save them. To be more specific they are betting on the Canadian apparel maker Joe Fresh to
accomplish this comeback. Nearly 700 stores began receiving this appeal in 2013 with high
expectations. New York retail consultancy Davidowitz & Associates’ founder Howard
Davidowitz believes that even though the brand is solid it will do little for sales. The goal that JC
Penney has adopted has become preposterous. As they set their target market on attracting a
younger, more stylish demographic they ignore the risk of launching a brand that isn’t that wellgrounded in the midst of massive failure (Castaldo, 2013).
The new CEO’s dramatic changes which included cost cuts, more fashionable
merchandise, and a new pricing strategy proved to be too much and happened far too quickly for
the loyal customers to adapt to. As a result of this and adequate testing on the impact of these
changes that were not followed up on the company shares dropped 27.6% in the first quarter. In
reality their customer base lost interest and there were no new customers added to the chain’s
users’ base. The wonderful anticipation of the arrival of Mr. Johnson in 2011 quickly dissipated
when the directors as well as the investors showed their disapproval. Johnson had failed to test
17
the changes he put into place which was the customary retail practice. Being unapologetic to not
test before moving forward was Johnson’s stand and he responded that having to do it all over
again he would do the same thing. Bringing Mr. Johnson on board cost JC Penney dearly as they
issued him with $50 million in stock (Lubin, 2013). The customers showed there approval of
Johnson’s tactics to cut back clearance sales. When Penney began to bring the markdowns back
the shoppers failed to respond. All of this resulted in a 25% decrease in sales which cost the
company $4.3 billion in revenue. It also presented dire concerns to analysts to wonder if JC
Penney could possibly be depleted of cash to fund the overhaul they were pursuing. The largest
shareholder activist hedge-fund manager William Ackman witnessed his holdings make steep
declines in the company’s shares. Ironically he was the one that was instrumental in replacing
Ullman who would eventually be asked to come back and replace Johnson (Hedge, 2013). Ron
was going after the wrong aspect of the business. He chose to take on the overall look of the
company i.e., the company logo, instead of dealing with the company’s merchandise. He was
basically a one man wrecking crew implementing a three-tier pricing strategy that did away with
in-store specials which the customers loved and was the J.C. Penney experience that brought
them in. Ron’s plan to make the company into a fashion-forward, hipper brand lost its
momentum when he abandoned sales and coupons in favor of a daily low price market strategy
(Linton, 2013).
Ron’s move to implement a “Fair & Square” strategy received a 58% initial approval
rating in a consumer report but then as the devastating figures in Q1 earnings report came out a
second poll saw the approval rating drop by 14% in just three months. When Penny sent out a
request for opinions, the feedback of negative responses was 67% and largely was the result of
the topics of coupons, sales, prices, merchandise, and advertising. This just reinforced the views
of the customers that were struggling with the recent changes. Johnson did admit that he
underestimated the importance the customers placed on sales and coupons. The goals that the
“Fair & Square” was looking to accomplish did not happen and instead of bringing customers
into the store it drove them into their competitor’s stores. JC Penney’s customer base was
severally damaged (Rogers, 2012).
CEO Johnson’s first year reign produced a bill of approximately $4.3 billion dollars
which is the amount of drop in sales within 12 months preceding his entry into the company.
This was directly due to his cut back on discounts and a rolled out plan to fill the stores with
dozens of branded boutiques. The conditions got worse with sales down 28.4% from a year
earlier in the fourth quarter. Eventually the losses amounted to $522 million. Their cash flow
showed $930 million which was a 38% decline from a year earlier. In the end Penney’s losses
amount to $985 million which was a disheartening difference from $152 million loss the year
before (Linton, 2013). Ullman who eventually took back over the duties as CEO said he will not
go back to the way the company was when he left it but we must do something to not alienate the
customer (Lubin, 2013).
4.6. Quiznos (QFA Royalties LLC)
Having once been a creditable challenger to the industry leader Subway, Quiznos is slipping
away. It wasn’t long ago that their popularity with its toasted subs seemed to be poised to
compete head to head with the dominate leader. They reached their peak in 2008 and at that time
had nearly 5,000 restaurants world-wide. Then four years later they were looking at a
considerable increase in the debt that threatened to destroy all they had accomplished up to that
point. Out-of-court restructuring deals with creditors in the beginning months of 2012 cut deep
18
into their organizational structure (Jargon & Glazer, 2013). This deal, cut Quiznos debt by more
than a third which calculated into approximately $570 million and resulted in an investment firm
by the name of Avenue Capital Group becoming the majority owners. After 32 years of striving
to get to the top, they had to settle on restructuring that cost them to settle on giving up a big part
of their ownership (Jargon & Glazer, 2013).
The Denver-based chain, that was once a contender, is now coping with a major
turnaround effort just to stay in business. One of the unsettling tasks they face is the
consideration as seeking concessions from creditors who are owed nearly $600 million (Jargon
& Glazer, 2013). Store closures and the burden on their emotional and mental well-being with
their franchisees added to their problems. Phoenix area franchisees sued the chain with claims
that they were practicing fraudulent trade infractions which included breach of contract
(Arellano, 2005). The law suit claimed that Quiznos did not make good on its promises regarding
the geographic aspect of placement of their stores. The franchise was not supposed the put their
stores close to each other, and that marketing and advertising fees were to be to enhance their
locations. In one area there were over a dozen stores which were in several miles of each other. It
a reality that many franchisees have come to grips with that Quizons has recruited other
franchisees way over and beyond what a given market could handle. The law suit also charged
that Quizons failed to honor their agreement to various franchisees that they had an option to
own multiple stores in their state (Jargon& Glazer, 2013; McMillan, 2004).
Quiznos problems with their franchisees have been around for a long time. Franchisees
are required to purchase their food and supplies from a Quiznos’ subsidiary. This has led to
lawsuits by the franchisees alleging that Quiznos is charging more than what they would pay to
purchase those goods from outside vendors. These lawsuits represented five potential classaction cases that eventually were settled in 2009 without admitting liability. Twelve lawsuits are
pending with six of them in arbitration. Fraudulently overcharging the franchisees for food and
supplies including not disclosing the markups before the franchisees entering into an agreement
or even during their entry into the agreement are the basis of the pending lawsuits. These high
costs have cut into the franchisees profits which caused many of them to close the doors (Jargon
& Glazer, 2013). Company officials were slow to return phone calls from franchisees, who often
are rookies at running restaurants and need help (Sasso, 2006).
As Quiznos denied this allegation they made an attempt to address the problem by
decreasing costs of food and supplies annually to competitive prices in the market place.
Dealing with this dilemma of store closures Quiznos sent out a memo to franchisees that
required them to give 90 days’ notice before closing their doors. This was an attempt by Quiznos
to allow them time to seek other buyers for the restaurant. Quizons’ turnaround plans have yet to
meet their expectations. This has resulted in key performance targets not being realized. While
bankruptcy protection could be an option the creditors continue to believe that a deal can be
made before this has to go to the courts (Jargon & Glazer, 2013; McMillan, 2004).
Quiznos inability to make a payment on a loan and restructuring negotiations had added
to their demise. Its Chief Executive responded in a memo to franchisees that they had reached a
deal with their lenders and equity partners that would allow them to continue working together
toward establishing a structure for future growth and success (Jargon & Glazer, 2013).
While Quizons was opening a new location every 16 hours in 2003 (McMillian, 2004),
they had become known as the fastest-growing chain. Since that time they have been reduced to
approximately 2,100 stores and the end of their closures are not in sight (Jargon & Glazer, 2014).
Oversaturation of their stores in a particular area was a major cause to this decline (Vidonic,
19
2008) and opened the door to other companies such as Jimmy John’s Franchise LLC and
Chicago-based Potbelly Corporation to enter their market (Jargon & Glazer, 2014).
5. DISCUSSIONS AND ANALYSIS
Companies rise and fall for different reasons. But one thing that seems to be consistent
throughout the decline and failure process of these companies that are referenced in this study is
that there is an opinion that each organizational function as seen in Figure 1 are intertwined.
Each seems to have a cause and effect on the other. When either of the internal workings of these
functions is left to move forward without the proper supervision there is reasonable logic that the
other two will surely suffer the consequences (Mourdoukoutas, 2011).
5.1. The Illustrative Examples of Organizational Challenges
Borders Group excelled in all three functions early on as they supplied many jobs and gave back
to social endeavors, instituted a system of inventory that helped them grow, and help set the
stage of consumer innovation of excellent customer service. Toward the end they had to lay off
thousands of employees, failed to stay connected to the changes taken place within their industry,
and their customer service started to go downhill (Hayes, 2011; Reilly, 1999).
Circuit City at one time, employed 60,000 employees, was seen as an exceptional
marketing example for others, and became an innovator in changing the electronics industry for
consumers (Romero, 2013; Wulf, 2011). Eventually thousands of employees would lose their
jobs, they stopped selling appliances during a time when the real estate boom was in the horizon,
and their once proud contribution to customer service became demoralizing and destructive.
In its early days, Kodak excelled in all three functions. For instance, on the social side,
the company has generated thousands of jobs; and contributed resources to its various
stakeholders including the national, the state of New York, and to its local community (i.e.
Rochester, NY). On the managerial function side, the company has implemented a very
successful marketing and sales strategies in the past via bundling its cameras with its film
processing photography technology, often giving cameras away to sell its film and processing
chemicals. Lastly, on the entrepreneurial function side, it offered consumers value through its
innovative products that allowed them to capture everyday moments (Mourdoukoutas, 2011).
However, the company failed to come up with new versions of its products that stand to its
competition. Kodak failed to leverage its core competences and capabilities to move into
emerging industries.
Eastman Kodak had all these functions working in conjunction with each other at the
beginning. They supplied a multitude of jobs and offered resources to the economy. Their
marketing strategy was very effective as they grew their business on their cameras and film
processing business. Consumers were given products that were innovative. Later on, Kodak’s
value and its contributions to society took a considerable decline. According to Mourdoukoutas
(2011), “Eastman Kodak’s decline and fall is a failure of its leader to develop the appropriate
buffers to keep competition from imitating and replicating its strategy; and to match effectively
corporate resources and capabilities with emerging market opportunities—an entrepreneurial
failure that eventually undermined its other two functions, leading to its demise” (para.6).
Failure to see the changing marketplace left them ineffective in staying competitive. Their once
innovative products and services became outdated.
Fisker Automotive from the start was never a big contributor in any of the three
organizational functions. They failed in being a contributor to the clean air initiative and
20
providing a significant workforce, their marketing strategy was a complete failure as they never
produced a marketable vehicle, and the dreams of leading the way for a high-performance,
electric car never saw the light of day (Krisher, 2013; Vaughn, 2013).
JC Penney Co. Inc. once was a dominate figure in the retail department store industry but
now is scrambling to stay alive. Their revenue has dropped significantly and this has caused
them to lay off many employees and cut back on their social agendas. Their once effective
marketing strategy was replaced with an ineffective one led by Ron Johnson and the results led
to an $87 million loss. Their innovative ways of attracting customers changed with their new
CEO’s attempts to be creative (Linton, 2013; PR Newswire, 2012). While the company once
performed to a high standard in all areas, it is waning in every function at this time.
Finally, Quiznos had become a serious competitor to their industry. Once having
approximately 5000 stores they now find that figure cut in half. Marketing their successful
toasted subs to rival their major competitor Subway failed to make the impact they had hoped for
(Jargon & Glazer, 2013; McMillan, 2004). Promoting thousands of entrepreneurs into business
has now turned into a financial failure as the company is now facing a multitude of lawsuits by
their franchisees (Jargon & Glazer, 2013; McMillan, 2004).
5.2. Organizational Decline by Stages Breakdown:
Organizational Decline takes into account the five stages that companies move through if there is
a lack of qualitative manageable skills. Exploring the data derived from each of the companies
mentioned in this paper allow this study to show the path of decline and where they appear on
the model of organizational decline (please refer to Figure). The authors of this study have
included the strategic leadership failure. This is designed to show how the important factor of
inadequate leadership has a powerful effect that leads companies through these various stages.
Borders Group entered the first stage, known as the blinded stage, of decline due to an
accumulation of external and internal changes that failed to take place to provide them with a
long-term growth plan. Their continued rapid growth of brick and mortar superstores during a
time of the internet explosion into their industry was just one many mistakes that put them into
this stage. From here they slipped into the inaction stage as they ignored the severity of their
actions such as increasing music sales when the trend of music sales was declining (Stage 2).
Their decline continued with their delayed reaction to the make major changes in the way
they do business (Stage 3 or Faulty Stage). Leaving stage 3 they were catapulted into
indecisiveness. This took hold as their leaders were unable to cope with the major reorganization
that was needed to turn them around (Stage 4 or Crisis Stage). Once the dissolution stage was
entered into the inevitable place of failure was upon them. Borders’ leader’s inabilities to grasp
the stages of decline were now too much for them to do handle (Strategic Leadership Failure).
The only thing left was to close the doors (Stage 5 or Dissolution Stage) [Daft, 2013; Harmon,
2012; Publishers Weekly, 2006; Reilly, 1999].
Circuit City’s move into the first stage of decline was due to their myopic view of their
competitors’ increasing dominance in their industry (Stage 1). This nearsightedness sent them
swiftly through stage 2 (Inaction Stage) and straight into the next stage of failure. In this stage
they reacted to the wrong signals of their decline and chose to get rid of their appliances, not
recognizing that their core was their source to success. This led to a downsizing of their
employees (Stage 3 or Faulty Action Stage). From here they have entered into Stage 4 where
they were scrambling to survive. At this stage of decline they saw no other option but to file
chapter 11 (bankruptcy) where they hope they could find a way to get back on track (Crisis
21
Stage). From this point the damage control failed to take place and they discontinued to operate
(Stage 5 or Dissolution Stage). Their leaders had failed to maneuver successfully through the
stages of decline and find a buyer to pull them out of their dilemma (Strategic Leadership
Failure) Gogoi, 2008; Wulf, 2011].
Eastman Kodak had been so successful for a long time that they couldn’t accept that they
were slipping into stage 1 of decline (Blinded Stage). This blindness took them swiftly into stage
2 where again their lack of actions to address the problems they were facing were adding to their
fall from the greatness they has once experienced (Inaction Stage). As they entered into stage 3
Kodak’s CEO’s efforts to address declining sales became ineffective (Faulty Action Stage).
Kodak now finds them in the crisis stage as is evidenced in the change of CEOs and their joint
venture with Hewlett-Packard in hopes to turn the tide of decline around (Stage 4). Leadership
roles up to this point have played a significant role in their decline (Strategic Leadership Failure)
[Daft, 2013; Tsao, 2001; Walters, 1999].
Fisker Automotive entered stage 1 with their inadequate knowledge and leadership to
operate in the automotive industry (Blinded Stage). Blinded by their own inabilities to perform
took them to the inaction stage. Here they ignored their faults and tried to sale the fact that they
were fine and things would change in their favor soon (Stage 2). Fisker failed to make the
necessary changes to improve the quality of their car in a timely manner and it landed them in
the faulty action stage (Stage 3). Fisker is now heavily in debt to the Government and their sales
are very disheartening. To avoid complete failure they sold their assets to a China based
company (Stage 4 or Crisis Stage). Time will tell if they can avoid stage 5 (Dissolution Stage).
JC Penny entered into stage 1 because of several reasons. One was not having seen the
uncertainty of external events that were taking place (Blinded Stage). Therefore they entered into
the stage 2 failing to swiftly make the appropriate changes needed to deal with the new
competition and other factors that were posing a considerable threat to their success (Inaction
Stage). Serious problems were at their doorstep and they needed to make a change and do it fast.
In Penny’s case their new CEO made the wrong change (Stage 3 or Faulty Stage). JC Penny now
finds that they are in the crisis stage and to avoid entering into the dissolution stage they have
chosen to change CEOs and get back to what made them successful (Stage 4) [Daft, 2013,
Castaldo, 2013, Lubin, 2013]. Bad leadership got them in this mess and maybe the new CEO can
lead them out (Strategic Leadership Failure).
Quiznos’ failure to see the problems relating to their franchisees led them into stage 1(Blinded
Stage). This put them uncomfortably in stage 2 where the failed to acknowledge they had a
problem and continued without the appropriate actions to change (Inaction Stage). From stage 2
they passed into stage 3 where they were facing serious problems and should have considered
making the changes needed to turn them around and avoid the next stage of decline (Faulty
Action Stage). Not having made the necessary changes to correct the problems they were facing
placed them soundly in stage 4 (Crisis Stage). Their continual denial of the problems they faced
with their franchisees will seal their complete demise (Stage 5 or Dissolution Stage). Their
leadership is faulty and bankruptcy is an option being considered (Strategic Leadership Failure)
[Jargon & Glazer, 2013; McMillan, 2004].
6. CONCLUSIONS AND LIMITATIONS
22
While the use of the word “organization’s failure” in this study does not necessarily mean its
death/bankruptcy, the purpose of this paper was to shed the light on the subject of organizational
challenges and failure and its relationships to organizational learning and rejuvenation through
its proposed theoretical framework and literature review.
The organization performs three major functions-namely: Social function, managerial,
and entrepreneurial. While its social function pertains to its very existence as a social institution,
its managerial function determines how economic resources should be allocated and how
different tasks must be performed. On the other hand, the entrepreneurial function focuses on the
discovery and exploitation of new business. While these three functions are interrelated, a failure
in any of these three functions negatively affects the other two. In addition to that, a firm needs
global individual who is strategically capable to lead the firm to be globally competitive. This in
of an advise that was given by an investor to Peter Relan, founder of 9+; “no matter how great an
idea is, success in business is more about the sailor than the boat” (Villano, 2014:48).
Using examples from real-life organizations’ challenges-namely: Borders Group, Circuit
City, Eastman Kodak, Fisker Automotive, JC Penny, and Quiznos; the study concluded that if an
organization fails to adequately manage its major functions, that could lead to its decline and
possible demise (figure 1). Additionally, while the study embraced Weitzel and Jonsson’s five
stages model of organization decline, it proposes the integration of leadership in each stage of the
model as shown in Figure 2 out of a belief in its central role to any organizational rejuvenation or
failure.
As this study is attempting to contribute to the knowledge of organizational failure and
rejuvenation, it has some limitations. The basic limitation of this study was that it is theoretical in
nature and descriptive of the experiences of selected organizations based on available literature.
7. PRACTICAL SIGNIFICANCE AND MANAGERIAL IMPLICATIONS
No study is complete without providing the significance of its finding and it would be remiss of
the authors to exclude it. This study was entered into so as to provide valuable information to the
business executives so that the obstacles that lie in the path of success could be overcome or
even all together avoided.
 The overlay of this particular study provides a course of action for a management style
that brings harmony between all stakeholders. Furthermore, this study places an estimable
connotation on leadership within an organization. Leadership demands a place of importance for
obtaining success. In any strategic management, process good leadership becomes the driving
force to preventing the formation of inefficiencies. It also aides in the process of acquiring the
many skills needed to align the necessary resources for an organization to be competitive within
its industry. As is mentioned in this study there are three major functions that an organization
performs to achieve this. To work within the framework of social, managerial, and
entrepreneurial functions (Mourdoukoutas, 2011); it is imperative that leadership obtain the skills
of being ambidextrous. Being able to look within a company’s mission and strategy, and not only
determining where and how a company is structured but how to bring the two together in an
harmonious fashion will define the level of leadership of an organization (Dess et. al., 2014).
As this paper proposed to illustrate causes that lead to organizational failures through its
proposed conceptual framework of organizational success and failure, the study has implications
for academics and practicing managers. The proposed model of interplay between the major
organizational functions (i.e. social, managerial, and entrepreneurial) and its relationship to the
23
organization strategic leadership function have been suggested in the desire to stimulate future
research in this area.
Another implication of the study is that, it suggests that Weitzel and Jonsson’s (1989)
model of organizational decline as proposed in Figure 2 be expanded to include the function of
the organization’s strategic leadership in each stage of the model as leadership is in the center of
any organizational failure or rejuvenation; has the ability to get information, prompt action, and
correct action on one hand. On the other hand, its lacking will lead to crisis and dissolution.
Therefore, further validation of the proposed models to assess the applicability of this
model to actual and multiple organizations is needed. Additionally, qualitative studies and semistructured interviews with focus multi organization leaders should be conducted in order to
examine the causal relationship of leadership to organizational success, failure, or rejuvenation.
A suggestion of this study is to empirically conduct research in various industries to
assess the applicability of this model to the general population of organizations. A final
suggestion of the study is to further empirically examine the dysfunctional organizational
attributes associated with organizational decline.
8. REFERENCES
Akdt, D. (2002). Taste: The problem in aisle one. Wall Street Journal (2002, Aug 16).
Arellano, K. (2005). Suit by 4 Quiznos franchisees in Denver is denied by judge. Denver Post,
The (CO),
Atkinson, D. (2012, January 8). Is Kodak about to join the humbled giants?. Daily Mail (United
Kingdom).
Bethune, B. (2013). An elegy for the strange death of film. Canadian Business, 86(17), 73.
Bogoslaw, D. (2007, Dec., 21). Circuit City Gets Crushed. Bloomberg BusinessWeek, 1.
Business Source Premier, Ipswich, MA. Accessed June 22, 2014.
Bulkeley, W. M. (2009, Jul 31). Kodak has a loss as sales fall 29%. Wall Street Journal.B:5.
Burritt, C. (2011). Kodak Tries to Bring Its Digital Revival Into Focus. Bloomberg
Businessweek, 21-22.
Bussey, J. (2012, Jan 05). The business: Kodak's long, slow slide. Wall Street Journal, A:2.
Cameron, K. S., Whetten, D. A., & Kim, M. U. (1987). Organizational dysfunctions of decline.
Academy of Management Journal, 30(1), 126-138.
Cameron, K.A., Sutton, R.I. & Whetten, A.D. (1988). Readings in Organizational Decline:
Frameworks, Research, and Prescriptions. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Cannon, M. D., & Edmondson, A. C. (2001). Confronting failure: Antecedents and consequences
of shared beliefs about failure in organizational work groups. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 22(2), 161-177.
Carmeli, A. & Sheaffer, Z. (2008). How learning leadership and organizational learning from
failures enhance perceived organizational capacity to adapt to the task environment. The
Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 44(4), 468.
Carpenter, M.A. & Sanders, W.G. (2009). Strategic Management. 2nd Edition, Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Castaldo, J. (2013). Saving JC Penney. Canadian Business, 86(7), 11.
Castelluccio, Michael (October, 2013). Creative destruction--through a lens. Retrieved on
February 1, 2014 from: Strategic Finance. Oct. 2013, Vol. 95 Issue 10, p.59-60. 3p.
Chakravarty, S. N., & Feldman, A. (1993). The road not taken. Forbes, 152(5), 40-41.
24
Crook, J. (2012, 21, Jan.). What Happened To Kodak’s Moment? Retrieved July 11, 2014 from:
http://techcrunch.com/2012/01/21/what-happened-to-kodaks-moment/
Grunwald, M. (2013). A Bump on the Road to Green. Retrieved on January 17, 2014 from:
Time, 0040781X, 5/27/2013, Vol. 181, Issue 20, p.12.2p
Daft, R. (2013). Organization Theory & Design. 11th Edition. Mason, OH: South-Western
Cengage Learning.
Dan, A. (2012). Kodak Failed By Asking the Wrong Marketing Question. Forbes.com.
1/23/2012. Retrieved on November 28, 2013 from:
http://www.forbes.com/sites/avidan/2012/01/23/kodak- failed-by-asking-the-wrongmarketing-question/
Davidson, P. (2014). J.C. Penney to cut 2,000 jobs. Turnaround plan to close 33 of retailer’s
stores. USA Today, Section B. Thursday, January 16, 2014, P. B1.
Dess, G. G.; Lumpkin, G. T.; Eisner, A. B.; & McNamara, G. (2014). Strategic management.
New York: NY, McGraw-Hill Irwin.
Dryden, P. (1998). JC Penney predicting, not reacting. Computerworld, 32(9), 41.
Duggan, D. (2011). Borders out of balance: Expansion, e-commerce, music CDs among
missteps. Crain's Detroit Business (Feb 9, 2011).
Fernando, R. S., Manuel, P. F., & Martinho isnard Ribeiro, d. A. (2013). Organizational decline:
A yet largely neglected topic in organizational studies. Management Research, 11(2),
133-156.
Fox News (2914). China billionaire eyes US market after snatching up taxpayer-backed Fisker.
Retrieved July 6, 2014 from: http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2014/06/09/fisker-inbankruptcy-now-poised-to-sell-in-us-auto/
Francis, J. (2012, Mar 30). Kodak results reveal impetus behind fall into chapter 11. Printweek,4.
Retrieved July 11, 2014 from:
http://search.proquest.com/docview/1010769283?accountid=25355
Fritz, B. (2013). Sony Pictures Chief: We’re Not Just Spider-Man. The Wall Street Journal,
Wednesday, November 27, 2013, P. B5.
Gibbs, L. (2003, 08). A kodak moment. Money, 32, 40. Retrieved April 21, 2014 from:
http://search.proquest.com/docview/197758103?accountid=25355.
Giessner , S.R. & Van Kneppenber, D. (2008). License to Fail: Goal definition, leader group
prototypicality, and perceptions of leadership effectiveness after leader failure.
Organizational Behavior and Human decision Process, 5(1), 14-35.
Gogoi, P. (2008, Feb. 29). Circuit City: Due for a Change? Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Retrieved
July 13, 2014 from: http://www.businessweek.com/stories/2008-02-29/circuit-city-duefor-a-change-businessweek-business-news-stock-market-and-financial-advice.
Gottardo, P., & Moisello, A. M. (2011). The fragmentation of entrepreneurial function and the
role of external control on management behavior. I - Business, 3(4), 339-344.
Harker, M. & Harker, D. (1998). The Role of Strategic Selling in the Company Turnaround
Process. Journal Of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 18(2), 55-67.
Harmon, S. (2012, Jan., 1). Retail Autopsy: What Killed Borders, Circuit City and Hollywood
Video. Retrieved July 5, 2014 from:
http://www.ecommercetimes.com/story/74252.html#sthash.4zwCjGaY.dpuf
Harrison, S. (2007). Borders hopes partnership with Sony will restore profitability. Crain's
Detroit Business, 23(52), 4.
25
Hart, A., Matulich, E., Rubinsak, K., Sheffer, K., Vann, N., & Vidalon, M. (2012). The rise and
fall of circuit city. Journal of Business Cases and Applications, 6, 1-7. Retrieved from
http://search.proquest.com/docview/1041255966?accountid=25355
Hartley, R.E. (2008). Management Mistakes and Successes. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
Inc.
Hayes, F. (2011). Seven IT lessons from the failure of borders. Retrieved on January
17, 2014 from: Computerworld. Vol. 45 Issue 5, p32, p.1.
Hedge fund manager admits to 'big mistakes' made at JC Penney. (2013). Global Banking News
(GBN),
Heine, K., & Rindfleisch, H. (2013). Organizational decline. Journal of Organizational Change
Management, 26(1), 8-28.
Hill, C.W.J & Jones, G.R. (2010). Strategic Management: An Integrated Approach. 9th Edition.
Mason, OH: South-Western Cengage Learning.
Hofman, M. (2002). Book Smart. Inc, 24(3), 136.
Hoovers.com (2014). J.C. Penney Company, Inc. Retrieved on February 9, 2014.
Jafee, D. (2001). Organization Theory: Tension and Change. Boston, MA: McGraw Hill.
Jargon, J. & Glazer, E. (2013, Dec 06). Crisis quickens at quiznos -- once-booming sandwich
chain struggles as it faces store closures, tension with franchisees. Wall Street Journal.
Johnson, D. (2012). Why Kodak Failed- and how to avoid the same fate. CBSnews.com.
1/24/2012.
Johnson, E. J. & Tversky, A. (1983). Affect, Generalization, and the Perception of Risk. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 45 (1), 20–31
Janakirma, N., Meyer, R. J., & Morales, A. C. (2006). Spillover Effects: How Consumers
Respond to Unexpected Changes in Price and Quality. Journal Of Consumer Research,
33(3), 361-369.
Kapner, S. & Prior, A. (2014, Feb. 27). J.C. Penny posts profit, predicts higher sales growth.
Wall Street Journal, P. B3.
Kell, J. & Ng, S. (Jan. 15, 2014). J.C. Penney to close 33 stores, cut 2,000 jobs. Retrieved on
June 2, 2014 from: www.marketwatch.com/story/jc-penney-to-close-33-stores.
Klein, A. (1999). Management: Shutter snaps on fisher's leadership at kodak. Wall Street
Journal, P. B1.
Komives, S.R.; Lucas, N., & McMahon, T.R. (2013). Exploring Leadership. Third Edition. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Krantz, J. (1985). Group processes under conditions of organizational decline. Journal of
Applied Behavioral Science, 21, pp. 1-17.
Krisher, T. (2013). Electric car maker Fisker Automotive lays off three-fourths of workers at
headquarters. The Canadian Press, Apr 05, 2013.
Lee, L.; Gongming, Q.; & Zhengming, Q. (2014). Inconsistencies in International Product
Strategies and Performance of High-Tech Firms. Journal Of International Marketing,
22(3), 94-113.
Lerner, Jennifer S., Deborah A. Small, and George Loewenstein (2004). Heart Strings and Purse
Strings: Effects of Specific Emotions on Economic Transactions. Psychological
Science,15 (5), 337–41.
Levine, C. H. (1978). Organizational decline and cutback management. Public Administration
Review, 38(4), 316.
26
Linton, E. (2013, April 8). JC Penney Fires CEO Ron Johnson, Brings Back Mike Ullman.
International Business Times. Retrieved on March 25, 2014 from:
http://www.ibtimes.com/
Lord, R.G. Binning, J.F., Rush, M.C. & Thomas, J.C. (1978). The effect of performance cues
and leader behavior on questionnaire ratings of leadership behavior. Organizational
Behavior and Human Performance, 21 (1978), pp. 27–39.
Lublin, J. S., & Mattioli, D. (2013, Apr 09). Penney CEO out, old boss back in. Wall Street
Journal.
Mattioli, D. (2012, Jan 06). Reporter's journal: Their kodak moments --- career snapshots:
Workers take a look back as many struggle with uncertainties about family finances,
retiree benefits. Wall Street Journal.
McMillan, S. (2004, Jun., 10). Five Phoenix-Area Sandwich Chain Franchisees Sue DenverBased Parent. Retrieved on June 3, 2014 from: http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-
118002379.html
Mehta, S. N. (2010). Paper Chase. Fortune, 161(2), 38.
Meindl, J.R. & Ehrlich, S.B. (1987). The romance of leadership and the evaluation of
organizational performance. Academy of Management Journal, 30 (1987), pp. 91–109
Mellahi, K., & Wilkinson, A. (2004). Organizational failure: a critique of recent research and a
proposed integrative framework. International Journal of Management Reviews, 5/6(1),
21-41.
Milliot, J. (2005, Oct. 24). Worried About Borders, Publishers Weekly. Retrieved July 4, 2014
from: http://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/print/20051024/31481-worried-aboutborders.html
Mourdoukoutas, P. (2011, Oct. 02). The Entrepreneurial Failure of Eastman Kodak. Retreived
on November 29, 2013 from:
http://www.forbes.com/sites/panosmourdoukoutas/2011/10/02/the- entrepreneurialfailure-of-eastman-kodak/
Muller, J. (2000, April, 3). Can Borders Turn the Page? Business Week, Retrieved July 4, 2014,
from: http://www.businessweek.com/stories/2000-04-02/can-borders-turn-the-page
Mui, C. (2012). How Kodak Failed. Forbes.com. 1/18/2012. Retrieved on November 28, 2013
from: http://www.forbes.com/sites/chunkamui/2012/01/18/how-kodak-failed/
Mui, Y. Q. (2008, Nov. 10). Circuit City Files for Chapter 11 Protection. The Washington Post.
Retrieved July 13, 2014 from: http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpdyn/content/article/2008/11/10/AR2008111002931.html
Orovic, J. (2012). JC Penney Revived: Five Lessons In Corporate Failure. International Business
Times (2012, February 2). Retrieved on March 25, 2014 from: http://www.ibtimes.com/
Osawa, J. & Inagaki, K. (2013). Sony’s Turnaround in Doubt. The Wall Street Journal, Friday,
November 1, 2013, P. B4.
Panaritis, M. (2011, July 27). Bid for some Borders book stores falls through. Philadelphia
Inquirer.
Peterson, V. (2014). Borders’s Group History - The History of the Borders Group Chain of
Bookstores. Retrieved July 5, 2014 from:
http://publishing.about.com/od/BooksellersAndBookselling/a/The-History-Of-TheBorders-Group- About-The-Borders-Group-Chain-Of-Bookstores.htm.
Pfanner, E. & Inagaki, K. (2014, May. 13). For Sony, Turnaround is Elusive. Wall Street
Journal.
27
Popken, Ben (2008). Updated: Breaking: Circuit City Closing 155 Stores. Retrieved April 12,
2014, from http://consumerist.coml2008111/updated-breaking-circuit-city-closing-155-
stores.html
Price, D. P. (2001, Oct 16). Go out a so-so company, come back a star. Wall Street Journal
Retrieved from: http://search.proquest.com/docview/398824935?accountid=25355
Probst, G., & Raisch, S. (2005). Organizational crisis: The logic of failure. The Academy of
Management Executive, 19(1), 90-105.
PR Newswire (2012, February 24). J. C. Penney Company, Inc. Reports 2011 Fourth Quarter and
Full-Year Financial Results. Retrieved May 16, 2104 from: http://www.prnewswire.com/
Publishers Weekly (2006, Nov. 27). Modest Gain in Chains' Third Quarter. Retrieved
July 3, 2014 from: http://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/print/20061127/15568-
modest-gain-in-chains-third-quarter.html.
Randall, R. (2011). Kodak's failure to exploit its digital edge is a lesson on complacency. Central
Penn Business Journal, 27(42), 15
Reid, C. (2001). Amazon.com in pact to take over Borders.com. Publishers Weekly, 248(16), 9.
Reilly, P. M. (1999, Feb 22). Retailing: In the age of the web, a book chain flounders. Wall
Street Journal Retrieved July 4, 2014 from
http://search.proquest.com/docview/398652118?accountid=25355
Rochester Business Journal (2012, Jan., 27). Rise and decline: an Eastman Kodak chronology.
Retrieved July 7, 2014 from: http://www.rbj.net/print_article.asp?aID=190222
Rogers, B. (2012). More Trouble Ahead for JC Penney. Forbes.Com, 29.
Romero, J. (2013). The rise and fall of circuit city. Econ Focus, 17(3), 31-33. Retrieved July 11,
2014 from http://search.proquest.com/docview/1474848864?accountid=25355
Rowe, W. G. (2001). Creating wealth in organizations: The role of strategic leadership. The
Academy of Management Executive, 15(1), 81-94.
Sasso, M. (2006, March 1). Franchisees Tell Cautionary Tale Of Quiznos' Red-Hot Expansion.
Tampa Tribune (FL).
Schwarz, N. (1990), “Feelings as Information: Informational and Motivational Functions of
Affective States,” in Handbook of Motivation and Cognition: Foundations of Social
Behavior,Vol. 2, ed. E. Tory Higgins and Richard M. Sorrentino, NewYork: Guilford,
527–61
Shafritz, J. M. & Ott, J.S. (2001). Classics of Organization Theory, fifth edition. Fort Worth, TX:
Harcourt College Publishers.
Sheppard, J. P., & Chowdhury, S. D. (2005). Riding the wrong wave organizational failure as a
failed turnaround. Long Range Planning, 38(3), 239-260.
Shufelt, T. (2013). The Ode: Fisker Automotive (2007-2013). Canadian Business, 86(9), 16.
Sitkin, S.B. (1992). Learning through failure: The strategy of small losses. Research in
Organizational Behavior, 14, 231-266.
Smith, G., & Keenan, F. (2002, Jan., 14). Kodak is the picture of digital success. Bloomberg
BusinessWeek.
Staw, B.M., Sandelands, L.E. & Dutton, J.E. (1981). Threat-rigidity affects in organizational
behavior: A multilevel analysis. Administrative Science Quarterly, 26, pp. 501-524.
Stopford, J. M. & Baden-Fuller, C. (1990). Corporate rejuvenation. The Journal of Management
Studies, Issue 27(4), p.399.
Stuart, A. (March 2006). The Importance of Accurate Forecasting: A CFO’s Perspective
28
Miller Heiman Sales Performance Journal, 1(1), 1-5. Retrieved on December 28, 2014
from: lmsleader.com/pdf/20-Importance_of_Accurate_Forecasting.pdf.
Syme, R. (2011, Jul., 19). Bye Bye Borders: What The Chain’s Closing Means For Bookstores,
Authors and you. Retrieved July 4, 2014 from:
http://www.npr.org/blogs/monkeysee/2011/07/20/138514845/bye-bye-borders-what-thechains- closing-means-for-bookstores-authors-and-you
Tejada, C. & McWilliams, G. (2003). Circuit City Salesmen Zapped on 'Bloody Wednesday'.
The Wall Street Journal, Classroom Edition. Reprieved July 13, 2014 from:
http://archive.today/uMYd7
Trachtenberg, J. A. (2010, Jan. 19). Borders Posts Big Drop in Holiday Revenue. The Wall Street
Journal.B:6.
Tsao, A. (2001, Nov., 25). Kodak: Not Enough Positive Development? BusinessWeek Online.
Retrieved March 21, 2014 from: http://www.businessweek.com/stories/2001-11-
25/kodak-not- enough-positive-development.
Vaughn, M. (2013). Fisker Departs Fisker. Autoweek, 63 (8), 0006.
Vidonic, B. (2008, July 6). Owners of shuttered local Quiznos stores sue company. Beaver
County Times.
Villano, M. (2014, July). Collective Wisdom. Entrepreneur.
Walonick, D. S. Ph.D. Organizational Theory and Behavior. Retrieved on June 3, 2014 from:
cmsu2.ucmo.edu/public/classes/Hensley/Organizational%20.
Waters, R. (1999, Jan., 15). Eastman kodak share price slides 10% Photographic Products
Failure to cut Costs Sparks Sell-Off. Financial Times.
Weitzel, W. & Jonsson, E. (1989). Decline in Organizations: A Literature Integration and
Extension, Administrative Science Quarterly. Vol. 34, pp. 99-109.
Whetten, D. A. (1980). Organizational decline: A neglected topic in organizational science.
The Academy of Management Review (Pre-1986), 5(000004), 577.
Whetten, D. A. (1981). Organizational response to scarcity-Exploring the obstacles to innovative
approaches to retrenchment in education. Educational Administration Quarterly, 17(3),
pp. 80-97.
Willis, B. (2003, Feb. 2). Cut backs at Circuit City. Retrieved July 13, 2014 from:
http://www.stereophile.com/news/11569/
Wulf, T. (2011). Good to great to gone. Training, 48(3), 20-22. Retrieved July 13, 2014 from:
http://search.proquest.com/docview/878897800?accountid=25355.
Zellar, B. (2001). Borders's 30th Anniversary. Publishers Weekly, 248(47), 30.
Zimmerman, A. (2000, August 16). JC Penney Reports 41% Decline In Fiscal Second-Quarter
Profit. Wall Street Journal - Eastern Edition. p. B6.
9. AUTHORS PROFILE
Dr. Issam A. Ghazzawi (Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh) is a Professor of Management and
Sam Walton Fellow at the University of La Verne, California. His areas of research include job
satisfaction, leadership, organizational effectiveness, and organizational commitment. He has
published several articles and cases in academic journals, including: the Journal of
Entrepreneurship Education, the Journal of the Academy of Business Administration, Journal of
Legal, Ethical and Regulatory Issues, the Journal of the International Academy for Case Studies,
29
the Business Case Journal, SAM Advanced Management Journal, Academy of Educational
Leadership Journal, the Journal of Entrepreneurship.
Tommy Cook (MBA, University of La Verne) is a graduate student pursuing a DBA degree. His
areas of research include organizational effectiveness and leadership. He is a contributor of
several academic articles and published author of “Fourth and Long”.