Silbernagel-Krohne, D. & Moser, T. (2023). Qualitative Case Study To Explore Former Employee Reasons For Resignation From Amazon - PDF Free Download. Retrieved November 27, 2023, from https://docplayer.net/235408801-Qualitative-case-study-to-explore-former-employee-reasons-for-resignation-from-amazon.html

‌


International Management Review Vol. 19 No. 2 2023
 32
Qualitative Case Study To Explore Former Employee Reasons For
Resignation From Amazon
Dina Silbernagel-Krohne
Tami Moser
Southwestern Oklahoma State University, Weatherford, Oklahoma, USA
tami.moser@swosu.edu
[Abstract] This qualitative study, intended to explore statements of former Amazon employees,
categorizes reasons for resignations, and provides answers to two questions. First, what are the
three main reasons Amazon Fulfillment employees give for resigning? Second, what percentage
of the total reasons do the top three represent and what minor themes exist within those three major
themes? Social media comments from the subreddit r/Amazon FC and Glassdoor websites madeSilbernagel-Krohne, D., & Moser, T. (n.d.). Qualitative Case Study To Explore Former Employee Reasons For Resignation From Amazon. International Management Review, 19(2), 2023. http://www.americanscholarspress.us/journals/IMR/pdf/IMR-2-2023/imr_v19_n2_art03.pdf

‌
by previous employees who self-terminated in 2021 and 2022 provided secondary data that was
organized into major and minor themes. The three major themes were management issues, difficult
work, and schedule hardships with six minor themes: toxic culture, poor management, negative
employee engagement, physically demanding, long hours, and shift schedule. Recommendations
to address the major and minor themes include a comprehensive culture change, shift
modifications, and updates to the internal transfer policy.
[Keywords] Amazon, fulfillment center, employee retention, warehouse, voluntary resignation,
turnover
Introduction
Since July 2021, macro forces in the economy have resulted in unemployment falling to .8 per
open position in the United States (US BLS, 2022a). The competition to coax employees from
their current organization results in companies offering higher-than-average hourly wages to entrylevel candidates and signing bonuses for salaried talent. Rampant inflation (Desilver, 2022) makes
these monetary benefits highly attractive. Therefore, switching to a new employer, though
inconvenient, is financially beneficial, with 51% of job changers seeing a real yearly increase;
however, 47% of those not changing experienced a net improvement (Kochhar et al., 2022) in the
2020 to 2021 period.
Turnover drives cost upward and productivity downward (Gandhi & Robison, 2021),
pushing against improvements in bottom-line figures required to achieve business goals.
Depending on the position, replacing an employee costs half to double their yearly pay (Gandhi &
Robison, 2021). Warehousing has seen a 1.11% year-over-year quit rate increase from July 2021
to June 2022 and a month-over-month increase of 1.13% from June 2022 to July 2022 (US BLS,
2022b). Historically, the warehouse component of the e-commerce process has a high turnover,
which the Great Resignation (Gandhi & Robison, 2021) exacerbated. This phenomenon continues
as a macro force pressing on the warehouse industry as younger generations of employees continue
to influence work culture, changing it from a command-and-control structure to an equal
partnership. As partners, they have little tolerance for employers they perceive as not meeting their
needs and seek new, more satisfying partnerships by changing companies.
The e-commerce industry grew to 14% of overall retail (US Census, 2022) in the second
International Management Review Vol. 19 No. 2 2023
 33
quarter of 2022, with Amazon enjoying 38% of the U.S. online market share (MarketLine, 2021).
Amazon Fulfillment turnover is more than double (Brancaccio et al., 2021) that of other warehouse
organizations, replacing 150% of its workforce yearly. This means that the largest e-commerce
retailer in the country loses 3% of its headcount every week. A leaked internal memo revealed that
Amazon could deplete available workers by 2024 (Sainato, 2022), and before stepping down as
CEO, Bezos announced a culture change to position Amazon as the Earth's best employer
(Brancaccio et al., 2021). The memo and culture change announcement indicate Amazon has
retention concerns and is attempting to mitigate turnover. With Amazon at double the turnover rate
of competitors (Sainato, 2022), Amazon's situation presents a unique case study for business
consultants looking to define and categorize causes of voluntary separation.
Purpose of the Study
This qualitative study intends to explore statements of former Amazon employees,
categorize reasons for resignations, and provide answers to two questions. First, what are the three
main reasons Amazon Fulfillment employees give for resigning? Second, what percentage of the
total reasons do the top three represent, and what minor themes exist within those three major
themes? Answers to these questions add to the body of business academic knowledge around
employee satisfaction, its impact on an organization's bottom line, and how managers and
consultants can address the issue. Amazon and companies like it can use this study's trend analysis
and recommendations to reduce turnover and, thus, reduce operational costs associated with hiring
replacements.
Literature Review
Two theoretical frames support this study, Herzberg's two factors (Bhatt et al., 2022) and
the concept of employee-centric organizations (Ramchandani & Singh, 2020). When Herzberg
initially published his work in the 1950s, it was a cultural norm to work at one or maybe two jobs
before retirement. As time passed, each successive generation increased the number of different
jobs throughout their careers. Currently, it is uncommon to spend even ten years at the same
company, as employees now see themselves as equal partners in the employer/employee
relationship and find other employment if their current company does not meet their needs.
The employee-centric concept describes the new normal of cycling between candidate and
employee roles (Ramchandani & Singh, 2020) throughout careers and within organizations.
Employee sentiment begins with initial interactions when candidates apply, evaluate an offer, and
decide if it is right for them. Then, as employees, they join the company and proceed to learn,
contribute, and grow. This model (Ramchandani & Singh, 2020) represents these employee
interactions with the employer as dynamic and cyclical.
Figure 1 identifies interaction times that drive sentiment as the employee revisits and
reevaluates employer value. Positive or negative first impressions (Koziol & Koziol, 2020)
become reinforced or changed by ongoing interactions and continue throughout the employee's
life cycle at the company in an infinite loop (Ramchandani & Singh, 2020). If employees become
too dissatisfied, they attempt to change their position within the company or leave entirely, thereby
becoming candidates again and starting the cycle over. In this case study, the ex-employees’
reasons for leaving (Koziol & Koziol, 2020) consist of stories involving one or more interactions
along the infinity loop.
International Management Review Vol. 19 No. 2 2023
34
Figure 1
Employee Journey Infinity Loop
Reprinted from "Employee Centric Organizations," by Ramchandani, S., & Singh, A., Delhi Business
Review,21(1), pg. 101.
The two factors in Herzberg's theory, hygiene and motivation, describe low and high
satisfiers or dissatisfiers (Herzberg et al., 1993) depending on whether the employer did or did not
meet those needs. High elements that motivate employees are recognition, advancement,
development opportunities, interesting work, and trust in decision-making (Bhatt et al., 2022).
Low elements are hygiene factors in that they are the minimum expectations workers have of their
employers: company policies, pay, working conditions, and company culture – toxic/cordial,
benefits, and job security (Bhatt et al., 2022). High factors will not motivate employees unless the
low (hygiene) factors are met first (Herzberg et al., 1993). Herzberg's two factors are evident in
the employee-centric concept as candidates weigh hygiene factors in deciding to join or continue
with the organization. Motivation factors determine if they will look inside or outside the company
when returning to the candidate cycle.
Review of Motivation Literature
Herzberg published The Motivation to Work in 1953 and reprised the concept with a publication
of the same name in 1993. While the concept of employer responsibility for employee motivation
and retention was innovative in the 1950s, it built upon Maslow's hierarchy of needs from 1943. A
Theory of Human Motivation (Maslow, 1943) explains that basic needs like physical safety and
physiological imperatives require satisfaction before higher needs emerge (Maslow, 1943).
Maslow asserted that people "lacking food, safety, love, and esteem would most probably hunger
for food more strongly than anything else" (Maslow, 1943, p. 373).
Herzberg's 1993 publication expanded the high and low factor model to include two
relationship levels between employees and leadership. Level one relationships had neither party
trusting the other, whereas level two relationships were mutually respectful and productive. The
affirmative employer/employee relationship trend continued with the positive psychology
movement of the 2000s that included work as a component of mental health because it is a source
of suffering or happiness (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000). Positive Psychology: An
Introduction (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000) reviewed fifteen articles about the topic and
concluded that focusing solely on fixing problems was not enough to create environments in which
people flourish (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000). Instead, the goal was to correct egregious
issues and then, with those resolved, move on to higher level fulfillment, which is congruous with
International Management Review Vol. 19 No. 2 2023
 35
both the Two Factor theory (Herzberg et al., 1993) and Maslow's work (Maslow, 1943).
Therefore, it is no surprise that the Motivation Hygiene Theory gained traction again as the
positive psychology movement emerged. Researchers reviewed scholarly writings on motivation,
positive psychology, and the Two Factor theory, concluding that Herzberg's theory proved positive
psychology is an aspect of human resource strategies (Sachau, 2007) by clarifying organizational
satisfiers. Other authors questioned if the Two Factor theory held its weight against the business
evolution away from Taylor-style functions (Bassett-Jones & Lloyd, 2005) by surveying 3,200
United Kingdom employees in government, utilities, services, retail, manufacturing, financial
services, and law enforcement. The Bassett-Jones & Lloyd (2005) survey found the Two Factor
theory useful, especially in translating employees' tacit knowledge into explicit process
improvements (Bassett-Jones & Lloyd, 2005).
After the recessions of the 2000s, employers faced greater competition for talent as workers
had more opportunities to leave with lower risk. As a result, the next evolution of the
employee/employer relationship happened with the voice of the employee. A random sampling of
346 middle eastern workers in Jordan resulted in 300 respondents (Alfayad & Mohd Arif, 2017)
and found employees who felt heard by employers had higher satisfaction. The authors specifically
acknowledged Herzberg's theory in stating employee voice as a motivating factor, demonstrating
the Two Factor theory was applicable into the 20-teens (Alfayad & Mohd Arif, 2017).
Motivation and satisfaction are even more important in the post-COVID business world as
employers face record-low unemployment and a workforce that values mental health and balance
more than ever (Bhatt et al., 2022). The employee-centric infinity model (Ramchandani & Singh,
2020) encompasses this uniquely 2020s concept, yet still aligns with Herzberg's theory because it
is two factor at its basis. Employee-centrism aids in defining constructs from Herzberg's theory to
confirm the validity of the Motivation Hygiene Theory almost 70 years later to guide research
about employee turnover.
Methods
This study uses secondary data from previous employees who self-terminated in 2021 and 2022 to
code reasons for attrition. Structure for analysis was provided by identifying open, axial, and
selective categories to organize reasons from ex-employee statements into major and minor themes.
Inclusion criteria limit analysis to the United States and exclude Amazon business lines other than
Fulfillment centers. Social media comments indicating resignation reasons found on the subreddit
r/Amazon FC and Glassdoor (Stamolampros et al., 2019) websites were used for manual sentiment
analysis (Young & Gavade, 2018).
First, open coding (Williams & Moser, 2019) is applied to the descriptive phrases on
Glassdoor, and r/Amazon FC identifies general themes. Then, axial analysis (Williams & Moser,
2019) classifies these generalities into specific codes. Next, the researcher identifies overlapping
concepts using selective coding, reducing the number of codes to no more than seven inferential
themes (Williams & Moser, 2019). Finally, inferential themes with the greatest number of
responses became the major themes of this study, representing the top three reasons employees
leave Amazon warehouses.
Limitations of the Study
The nature of secondary data means responses are not specifically answering questions (Kumara,
2022) about resignations and may lack detailed information. Limitations to the study include the
inability to ask follow-up questions as a researcher might when interviewing a human subject.
International Management Review Vol. 19 No. 2 2023
 36
Several axial codes in the management issue major theme could be consolidated if there were more
clarity in stated reasons regarding what the ex-employees meant by poor management. Lacking
granular information, poor management became a catchall for remarks indicating manager-related
resignation reasons like "learn to really manage" and "need better managers." Without specifics, it
is challenging for an organization to create training or strategies to develop managers in ways that
would decrease employee turnover. One final limitation is the lack of control over how the data is
collected (Kumara, 2022) and stored online. Whether a comment stays online is at the discretion
of Glassdoor social media employees and the subreddit moderator.
Introduction to Results
The comments compiled from Glassdoor.com and the subreddit r/Amazon FC on Reddit.com
spanned the rolling year December 2021 to December 2022. The sum of individuals commenting
was 220, with 110 from Reddit and 110 from Glassdoor; however, some individuals indicated more
than one reason for resigning, leading to 347 reasons in total. As shown in Table 1, 147 reasons
originated on Reddit and 200 on Glassdoor.
Table 1
Individuals and Resignation Reasons
Source Individuals Commenting Reasons
 Comments Percentage Reasons Percentage
Reddit 110 50% 147 42%
Glassdoor 110 50% 200 58%
Totals 220 100% 347 100%
Coding
The analysis categorized reasons into open, axial, and selective coding (Williams & Moser, 2019)
to define major and secondary themes. Each selective coding category had several axial
subcategories with the most significant representing minor themes. Selective coding revealed three
major themes previous Amazon employees gave for leaving that encompassed 69% of all reasons:
management issues, difficult work, and the schedule caused hardship. Management issues
accounted for 28% of the reasons, difficult work was 23%, and schedule hardship 18%, as
indicated in Table 2.
International Management Review Vol. 19 No. 2 2023
 37
Table 2
Selective Coding Distribution
*Top 3 represent 69% of all reasons
Thematic Findings
Despite analysis identifying thirty-eight unique axial codes, more than one-third of the minor
themes came from only six codes. Similarly, selective coding comprised eight codes, yet almost
three-quarters of the data resided in three codes that became major themes. The top three selective
codes, representing the major themes, encompass 69% of reasons ex-employees gave for resigning,
while the six minor themes combined were 36% of reasons. Major and minor theme percentages
by employee level in Table 3 identify concerns that caused more resignations by hourly versus
salaried positions. Hourly associates are supervised by hourly process assistants with their salaried
direct managers referred to as area managers. The area managers’ report to the next level up,
operations managers, who are senior operations managers supervise. Senior operations managers
are not represented in the data because there were no comments on Reddit or Glassdoor from this
level of employee.
Table 3
Reason Percent by Theme and Employee Level
 Percent of Major Theme Percent of All
Reasons
Major Themes
 Minor Themes
Amazon
Associate
(AA)
Process
Assistant
(PA)
Area
Manager
(AM)
Operations
Manager
(OM)
Management Issues 83% 4% 10% 2% 28%
Toxic Culture 11% 0% 2% 1% 4%
Poor Management 14% 0% 0% 0% 4%
Negative Employee
Engagement
 10% 1% 1% 0% 3%
Difficult Work 90% 1% 7% 1% 23%
Physically Demanding 47% 1% 0% 0% 11%
Schedule Causes Hardships 75% 5% 19% 1% 18%
Long Hours 34% 0% 9% 0% 8%
Shift Times/ Overnights/
Inflexible Hours
 22% 3% 8% 0% 6%
Selective
Code
Number of
Reasons
Percent of
Total Reasons
Management Issues * 96 28%
Difficult Work * 81 23%
Schedule Causes Hardship * 64 18%
Pay 33 10%
H.R. Issue 27 8%
Disliked the Work 16 5%
Location 15 4%
Nonspecific 15 4%
Totals 347 100%
International Management Review Vol. 19 No. 2 2023
 38
Management Issues
The first major theme was management issues, with 28% of the overall reasons coded.
Management issues had sixteen axial codes associated with them compared to the two other major
themes, difficult work and schedule causes hardship at seven and five axial codes, respectively.
Within this major theme, three minor themes were toxic culture, poor management, and negative
employee engagement, representing 11% of the total reasons. These minor themes were a
considerable weight within the major theme, since they were thirty-nine out of ninety-six
management issue reasons, or 41% of the management issues' axial code reasons. Table 3 shows
most management issue respondents were associates (83% in the major category) followed by area
managers with 10%.
Toxic Culture
The toxic culture minor theme accounts for 14% of the overall management issue reasons for
resignation with all employee levels commenting on the culture except for process assistants.
Breaking this 14% down into employee levels, associates had the most to say, with 11% of toxic
culture comments, followed by area managers at 2% and operations managers at 1%. Several
different Amazon Associates (AAs) called it out with specifics like "purposefully creating a toxic
environment to ensure high turnover rates," "finally quit the toxic building," and "toxic culture and
people." Area managers (AMs) and operations Managers (OMs) did not use the phrase toxic
culture but provided insights like "too large to see circumstances that do not align with its tenets"
and "poor ethics."
Poor Management
The second minor theme is poor management, with 14% of this major theme's reasons. Many
reasons were vague, with various commenters using phrasing like "learn to really manage" and
"advice to management: do better." However, some commenters gave specifics about feeling
distanced from leadership, saying "never once have I seen my manager," "hire professional adults
not fresh out of college," and "high turnover rate (of managers)…creates barriers between
employees and employer." Only AAs commented on this minor theme, with zero process assistants
(PAs), AMs, or OMs indicating poor management as an issue for leaving, possibly because the
other levels are leadership positions and, as such, generally lumped together as management by
frontline employees.
Negative Employee Engagement
The last minor theme, negative employee engagement, is 12% of the management issue major
theme where AAs, PAs, and AMs all gave this reason. AAs contributed 10% to this theme, and
PAs/AMs were equally divided among the remaining 2%, stating they received negative treatment
or comments from higher-ups. Associates indicated their managers "made comments that make
you not want to be there" and felt "managers are not kind." PAs and AMs had similar thoughts
because higher-level leaders "makes you feel less than" and provided advice, such as "empathy is
the key to motivation."
Difficult Work
The second major theme was difficult work, shown in Table 3, with 23% of overall reasons in the
data set. AAs again provided most reasons at 90% with AMs at 7% and then PAs/OMs at 1% each.
This category spanned reasons from physical to mental difficulties, including stress or workload.
Since AAs provided most reasons, the physically demanding aspect of the job was the primary
International Management Review Vol. 19 No. 2 2023
 39
minor theme within the difficult work category at 47% of the major theme. Amazon associates and
PAs found Amazon physically demanding, while AMs and OMs thought it was stressful and
confusing and had a heavy workload.
Physically Demanding
Unsurprisingly, warehouse work is physically demanding, but it is a significant minor theme for
an organization with double the turnover of industry standards. Table 3 notes that 11% of total
reasons mentioned this concern, as several ex-employees explained "heavy boxes and constant
pushing and pulling motions," "it breaks down your body," and "trying to stuff boxes that were
literally larger than me." It is worth noting that several different comments contained reasons that
combined the physicality of the job with a non-physical work stressor like "caused me panic
attacks" and "they time everything."
Pay Affected Perception
Pay was not one of the top three major themes, but its impact on employee perception of physical
demands during their tenure at Amazon is worth noting. Many commenters combined pay with
physical work reasons in instances of "breaking backs for paychecks," "you will work hard…they
could pay more," and leaving Amazon for a job "making a little bit more without the hard labor."
In this minor theme, former employees also noted the imbalance of pay versus long hours driving
employee dissatisfaction.
Schedule Causes Hardship
All employment levels in Table 3 stated the schedule as a cause for leaving Amazon, possibly due
to typical Amazon schedules of ten hours, four days a week. Furthermore, the schedule increases
to eleven hours per shift during overtime, sometimes with an additional fifth day. Two of the five
axial codes emerged as minor themes: long hours and shift times/ overnights/ inflexible hours.
Together these minor themes represent 14% of overall reasons from former employees. Within the
schedule major theme, 56% of AA reasons were these minor themes as reasons for leaving, while
17% came from AMs, and 3% from PAs. The third major theme was schedule causes hardship,
encompassing 18% of all reasons for resignation.
Long Hours
Associates comprised 34% of the long hours minor theme and area managers 9%, while PAs and
OMs did not state long hours as a problem. The ten hours shifts (11 on overtime) were seen by
different associates as issues because "shifts felt they were never going to end," and the work
"drained me" because it was "too many hours to work in one day." Various AMs on salary felt they
"put in more hours than what you get paid for" due to "having to work after working hours" and
"12-13-hour days even though your offer letter will say 10 hours." Both hourly and salaried
employees were unsatisfied with breaks, with AA reasons like "long hours, short break" and AMs
stating, "long hours no/short breaks."
Shift Times/Overnights/Inflexible Hours
Table 3 shows that AA reasons totaled 22% of this minor theme, with 3% from PAs and 8% from
AMs, meaning both hourly (AAs / PAs) and salaried (AMs) staff were both dissatisfied enough
with their schedules to leave the company. Former Amazonians found their assigned schedule did
not fit their work/life balance, overnights created family issues, and the inflexibility of schedules
International Management Review Vol. 19 No. 2 2023
 40
limited opportunities to improve balance. One AM "wasn't a fan of overnights," while another said,
"your schedule really isn't your schedule." Several hourlies indicated they "did not like night shift,"
while others resigned "to be rehired at Amazon for the job schedule they denied me a transfer to"
and "reapplied and got the job I tried transferring to." The internal inflexibility to transfer pushed
some associates to risk leaving so they could apply for openings on preferred shifts and locations.
Significance of Findings
This qualitative study intended to explore statements of former employees and categorize reasons
for resignations from Amazon. While the study fulfilled its purpose, the major and minor themes
provided insights about its significance in three areas. First, for Amazon specifically, there is a
compilation of causes for warehouse turnover the organization may utilize in strategic
improvements to reduce resignations. Second, the study provides information on the warehousing
industry's turnover, considering warehousing has significant turnover overall. Third, it contributes
to the pool of academic knowledge for one of the costliest expenses in any business.
Interestingly, the major themes parallel other research on employee resignation. The study showed
pay was not one of the top three reasons, but rather employees felt management was inadequate,
the work was too demanding, and the schedule was incompatible with their lives. These findings
support Gallup surveys (Gandhi & Robison, 2021) wherein disengagement was the primary factor
for turnover rather than pay. At the same time, a Pew study found income as a primary turnover
reason (Parker & Horowitz, 2022), unlike the Amazon data in this study. Still, other reasons found
by Pew Research do overlap.
Several concerns from the Pew study were feeling disrespected, childcare issues, and
working too many hours, which align with this study's major themes of management issues and
schedule hardship. However, one major theme of this study seems specific to Amazon as a primary
reason for changing jobs: difficult work. This major theme was 23% of all reasons, with the minor
theme of physicality found in 11% of all reasons for resigning (Table 3). Perhaps Amazon
warehouses are more physically demanding than others, leading to high turnover. Compared to the
industry's 49% (US BLS, 2021), Amazon's turnover was more than double (Kantor et al., 2021),
and company spokespeople did not deny the statistic when responding to media (Segal, 2022).
Another possibility is Amazon's ten-to-eleven-hour shifts might be too lengthy for the physical
nature of the work versus an eight-hour shift.
Recommendations for Application and Research
Address Management Issues with Culture Change
The three minor themes within the management issue major theme, toxic culture, poor
management, and negative engagement, are symptoms of poor culture because they exist as level
one (Herzberg et al., 1993) relationships in Herzberg's model. Level one relationships have one
party in charge and the other subordinate, with neither party trusting the other. Moving culture to
level two (Herzberg et al., 1993) establishes a professionally distant relationship with trust between
the parties to perform duties fully without inflicting harm. Therefore, the recommendation is to
change Amazon's warehouse culture from level one to level two.
Considering Amazon created the culture, a management consultant or agency provides
fresh eyes and new perspectives. Installing an Amazon leader and team in each warehouse
reporting directly to a national leader instead of facility leadership is advisable to ensure
consultants receive information required to assess each warehouse's culture and tailor
recommendations accordingly. In addition to specific improvements suggested by the consultation
International Management Review Vol. 19 No. 2 2023
 41
team, Amazon should tie cultural enhancements to performance and compensation (Schein &
Schein, 2017) in performance appraisals (Hofstetter & Harpaz, 2015).
Modify Number of Hours Worked per Shift
Amazon employees may perceive the work as more physically demanding than other warehouse
positions due to the four-day, ten-hour shift schedule. Adjusting to eight-hour shifts and five-day
weeks is one option for addressing the major theme of difficult work and the minor theme of
physically demanding activities. The shorter shift would provide more recovery time before
returning to work. However, this may move resignation reasons away from difficult work to the
five-day schedule causing hardship if the additional day creates work/life challenges for the staff.
Focus groups, surveys, and town hall meetings to gather interest and understand what most
workers prefer can offer insight into the feasibility of shorter shifts but more days. An alternative
recommendation is to increase break times for recovery during the shift. This option means less
productive time each shift, but a trial in select warehouses could provide data on cost/benefit of
less volume from the increased break times versus improved productivity and cost savings from
reduced turnover.
Restructure Overnight Shifts and Transfer Policies
This recommendation addresses the schedule hardships in the third major theme. Several
commenters mentioned transfer request denials as the reason they resigned. Then they applied as
external applicants to open positions on their preferred shift and were often rehired. It appears
Amazon prioritizes external hires over internal transfers for preferred shifts. If this is true, changing
the policy to prioritize internal transfers would reduce turnover and begin to address the reported
eight billion dollars (Segal, 2022) spent annually on replacing staff.
Also, this category had a significant number of reasons from AMs and AAs since both
disliked the overnight shifts and long hours. Addressing long hours for hourly AAs was already
discussed in the second recommendation. As for salaried AMs, the recommendation is to assess
the workload requiring twelve to thirteen hours for ways to eliminate or consolidate tasks and
reduce the shift by one to two hours. In addition, a data-based determination is required to decide
if the benefits of running night shifts outweigh the costs associated with replacing staff that leave
due to overnight shifts. If day shifts do not have enough capacity to ship required volumes and
eliminating night shifts is not feasible, the recommendation is to reduce the number of night shifts
from seven days a week to four or five. This option requires less headcount per week staffed on
overnights while moving more headcount to day shifts. Although there would likely still be higher
turnover on nights versus days, there would be less overall turnover.
Conclusion
Currently, the US is in an era of low unemployment, quiet quitting, and rage applying as worker
sentiment continues its evolution away from acquiescence to command and control organizational
structures. Therefore, understanding the root causes of employee dissatisfaction can help
employers progress toward employee-focused models by developing tailored retention programs.
Amazon has acknowledged the need to adapt with an updated mission statement indicating its
intent to become Earth's most employee-centric company. Data-based recommendations, like those
in this case study, may enable Amazon's retention strategies to achieve this goal without trial-anderror cycles draining resources.

International Management Review Vol. 19 No. 2 2023
 42
References
Alfayad, Z., & Mohd Arif, L. S. (2017). Employee voice and job satisfaction: An application of
Herzberg's two-factor theory. International Review of Management and Marketing, 7(1).
Bassett-Jones, N., & Lloyd, G. C. (2005). Does Herzberg's motivation theory have staying power?
Journal of Management Development, 24(10), 929–943.
https://doi.org/10.1108/02621710510627064
Bhatt, N., Chitranshi, J., & Mehta, M. (2022). Testing Herzberg's two factor theory on millennials.
Cardiometry(22), 231–236.
Brancaccio, D., Garretson, M., Conlon, R., & Shin, D. (2021, June 18). Is Amazon's high turnover a huge
red flag or the secret to its dominance? NPR. Marketplace.
https://www.marketplace.org/2021/06/18/amazon-workforce-turnover-dominance-investigation/
Desilver, D. (2022). In the U.S. and around the world, inflation is high and getting higher. Pew Research
Center. https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2022/06/15/in-the-u-s-and-around-the-worldinflation-is-high-and-getting-higher/
Gandhi, V., & Robison, J. (2021). The great resignation is really the great discontent. Gallup.
https://www.gallup.com/workplace/351545/great-resignation-really-great-discontent.aspx
Herzberg, F., Mausner, B., & Snyderman, B. B. (1993). The motivation to work. Routledge.
Hofstetter, H., & Harpaz, I. (2015). Declared versus actual organizational culture as indicated by an
organization's performance appraisal. The International Journal of Human Resource
Management, 26(4), 445–466. https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2011.561217
Kantor, J., Weise, K., Ashford, G., & Villegas, A. (2021). The Amazon that customers don't see. New
York Times, 170(59090), A1-A22.
Kochhar, R., Parker, K., & Igielnick, R. (2022). Majority of U.S. workers changing jobs are seeing real
wage gains. Pew Research Center. https://www.pewresearch.org/socialtrends/2022/07/28/majority-of-u-s-workers-changing-jobs-are-seeing-real-wage-gains/
Koziol, L., & Koziol, M. (2020). The concept of the trichotomy of motivating factors in the workplace.
Central European Journal of Operations Research, 28(2), 707–715.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10100-019-00658-5
Kumara, A. S. (2022). Researching with secondary data: A brief overview of possibilities and limitations
from the viewpoint of social research. Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis. IDEAS Working Paper
Series from RePEc.
MarketLine (2021). MarketLine industry profile: Online retail in United States. Online Retail Industry
Profile: United States, 1–72.
Maslow, A. H. (1943). A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review, 50(4), 370–396.
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0054346
Parker, K., & Horowitz, J. (2022). Majority of workers who quit a job in 2021 cite low pay, no
opportunities for advancement, feeling disrespected. Pew Research Center.
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2022/03/09/majority-of-workers-who-quit-a-job-in-2021-
cite-low-pay-no-opportunities-for-advancement-feeling-disrespected/
Ramchandani, S., & Singh, A. K. (2020). Employee-centric organizations: A conceptual framework with
drivers and consequences. Delhi Business Review, 21(1), 99–114.
https://doi.org/10.51768/dbr.v21i1.211202017
Sachau, D. A. (2007). Resurrecting the motivation-hygiene theory: Herzberg and the positive psychology
movement. Human Resource Development Review, 6(4), 377–393.
Sainato, M. (2022). Amazon could run out of workers in US in two years, internal memo suggests. The
Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2022/jun/22/amazon-workers-shortageleaked-memo-warehouse
Schein, E., & Schein, P. (2017). The corporate culture survival guide (Third edition). John Wiley & Sons.
Segal, E. (2022). Amazon responds to release of leaked documents showing 150% annual employee
turnover. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/edwardsegal/2022/10/24/amazon-responds-torelease-of-leaked-documents-showing-150-annual-employee-turnover/?sh=b9a827f1d0ba
International Management Review Vol. 19 No. 2 2023
 43
Seligman, M. E. P., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Positive psychology: An introduction. The American
Psychologist, 55(1), 5–14. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.5
Stamolampros, P., Korfiatis, N., Chalvatzis, K., & Buhalis, D. (2019). Job satisfaction and employee
turnover determinants in high contact services: Insights from employees'online reviews. Tourism
Management, 75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2019.04.030
US BLS. (2021). Economic New Release: Annual total separations rates by industry and region, not
seasonally adjusted. US Bureau of Labor Statistics.
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/jolts.t16.htm
US BLS. (2022a). Graphs for economic news releases. US Bureau of Labor Statistics.
https://www.bls.gov/charts/job-openings-and-labor-turnover/unemp-per-job-opening.htm
US BLS. (2022b). Quit levels and rates by industry and region. US Bureau of Labor Statistics.
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/jolts.t10.htm
US Census. (2022). Quarterly retail e-commerce sales 2nd quarter 2022. US Census.
https://www.census.gov
Williams, M., & Moser, T. (2019). The art of coding and thematic exploration in qualitative research.
International Management Review, 15(1), 45-55,71-72.
Young, L. M., and Gavade, S. R. (2018). Translating emotional insights from hospitality employees'
comments: Using sentiment analysis to understand job satisfaction. International Hospitality
Review, 32(1), 75–92. https://doi.org/10.1108/IHR-08-2018-0007
 

Silbernagel-Krohne, D., & Moser, T. (n.d.). Qualitative Case Study To Explore Former Employee Reasons For Resignation From Amazon. International Management Review, 19(2), 2023. http://www.americanscholarspress.us/journals/IMR/pdf/IMR-2-2023/imr_v19_n2_art03.pdf

‌