Ukeni, Chukwuka. (2022). Strategy Behind the Business Success of Amazon: A Case Study. TEXILA INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT. 8. 116-131. 10.21522/TIJMG.2015.08.01.Art009. 

Texila International Journal of Management
ISSN: 2520-310X
DOI: 10.21522/TIJMG.2015.08.01.Art009
Received: 20.01.2022 Accepted: 17.02.2022 Published on:28.02.2022
Corresponding Author: Chukwukaukeni49@gmail.com
Strategy Behind the Business Success of Amazon: A Case Study
Chukwuka Sunday Ukeni
Department of Business Management, Texila American University, Guyana, Zambia
Abstract
The success of any business is dependent on the strategy/strategies that are deployed in the operation
of such a business. Strategy is a critical determinant of business success. Amazon.com is one of the most
successful brandsin the world; the company has been in business for overtwo decades and has recorded
an unprecedented business success in human history. In this research work, the key strategy behind the
success of Amazon will be extensively investigated. Given the unusual success rate of this organization
over the past two decades and their high prospect for greater success, it becomes imperative to
investigate the strategy behind this tremendous business success in-order to unveil and/or re-emphasize
an established business principle that may not be obvious to many businesses. The purpose of this
research is mainly to identify these strategies and extend further emphasis on the viability of such
business strategies in order to strengthen existing research on the subject matter. Using the waterfall
methodology, the history of the company will be reviewed, the financial reports, company memos, press
releases, etc., will be analysed. The evolvement of the business from its inception as an online book
retailer to its diversification into numerous other lines of businesses will be reviewed and analysed.
Keywords: Amazon, Brand, Customer, Management, Strategy, Success.
Introduction
The purpose of this research is primarily to
fulfill part of the requirements of my MBA
program on Strategic Management/International
Business with Texila American University.
When the success of Amazon is considered
and discussed today, it will be difficult to believe
that it all started at its founder’s garage. Yet
that’s exactly where Jeff Bezos floated the online
bookstore that has now culminated into a worldclass phenomenon.
At the preliminary stages of the company,
Bezos and his then employees would gather
books and convey them to the post office
themselves, and even after the company began to
build warehouses and acquire more assets, many
investors still wrote off the venture as dead on
arrival, especially because of the dominance of
brands like Borders and Barnes & Noble, so it
was believed they would be wiped out by the
existing popular brands.
Instead, major brands like Borders and Barnes
& Noble later filed for bankruptcy protection in
2011 and are almost no longer in business.
Meanwhile, Amazon has not only excelled in
their first line of business but has widened their
reach to cover almost every conceivable kind of
product, media, and service. Some study shows
that as of 2018, it accounted for nearly half of
online retail. This information retrieved from
eMarketer further revealed that in that period,
Amazon was laying the groundwork for a
physical retail business.
In their last 26 years of operation, Amazon’s
progression from bookseller to the world’s
leading eCommerce marketplace has been mindboggling, even though – according to the
architect of its rise – building the “everything
store” was all part of the plan from the beginning.
Considering the outstanding success of the
company as briefly highlighted above, the
strategy behind this compelling business success
1
is one that should not only go unnoticed but also
worth studying, especially for a student seeking
any form of degree in the field relating to the
subject of strategy, such as Strategic
Management.
The research takes a look at the Amazon brand
as a case study. It covers the operation and
activities of Amazon.com from the inception of
the company to date, with an aim to identify the
major strategy(s) behind its outstanding success
in business. In the course of the study, the annual
financial statements of the company were
analyzed, as well as the company’s policies on
customer relationship management, human
resource management, etc. A critical area that
was given attention is the area of product
development and how it has contributed to
meeting the company’s vision and goals. The
results of the company’s performance in line
with its strategy and policy implementation was
analyzed and presented in the study. The
company’s expansion programs and procedures
from America to different parts of the world was
analyzed, and the results were presented.
Another vital area that was covered is a study of
the founder of the company and his ideologies
and how it has contributed to the business
success. The experience and leadership style of
the company as well as the organizational
culture, was analyzed to understand how it has
contributed to the entire business success. The
study was concluded by highlighting sufficiently
the key strategy that is behind the business
success of the company and how the same
strategy can be adopted by other businesses
around the world, to drive the realization of their
vision and goals. It also attempted to show how
Amazon has consistently followed this strategy
in its business operations to date.
There are various existing researches on
Amazon and its business success, many of which
were consulted during the research. However,
this is an addition to existing research as it
focused mainly on the key strategy(s) behind the
success of Amazon and how it can be replicated
by other businesses around the world.
Materials and Methods
Many researches have been conducted on the
success story of Amazon.com, a 26-year-old
brand with an outstanding business performance
that sets a standard for the global business space
in general and the e-commerce industry in
particular. The company is the largest ecommerce business in the world today, and the
evolvement of the brand over the years to reach
its present level ofsuccess has caught the interest
of many researchers, as such, it has become a
major subject of research globally.
According to existing research and available
information, Amazon.com officially began
operation on July 16, 1995, as an online
bookseller. By August 31 of the same year, the
company had shipped books to all the 50 states in
America and to the other 45 countries in the
world. By December 1996, the company had
reached 180,000 customers after its full year in
operation, and less than a year later, in October
1997, it had one million customer accounts. The
number of customer accounts has grown to over
76 million as at October 2020.
Although existing research provides elaborate
information about the business strategy of
Amazon, the key strategy(s) that has been
consistent from the inception of the company till
date, which in my opinion is largely responsible
for the long-term success of the business, still
needsto be further investigated. Furthermore, the
business ideologies of the founder that have
remained consistent to date also have to be
investigated, as the outcome of these
investigations will serve as an additional and
effective tool (working principle) in the arsenal
of strategic business consultants, CEOs, and
business managers. The study of strategic
management will come to life when such
practical business strategies are investigated to
validate the principles already taught and
practiced in the field.
2
The History of Amazon.com
According to [1], Amazon officially began in
July 1995 by Jeff Bezos, who did not know much
about the internet at the time (even though he was
a graduate of computer science), but came across
a statistic that the internet was growing at
2300%, and was convinced by this statistics to
take advantage of the opportunity. However, [2]
found that the Amazon brand was actually born
on July 5, 1994, but officially commenced
operation in 1995. The findings of [3], also agree
with this. However, it further reveals that the
name Amazon.com was officially registered on
November 1, 1994 by Jeff Bezos and his wife,
after considering and registering domain names
like Awake.com, Browse.com, Bookmall.com,
and Relentless.com in an attempt to choose the
best name for the brand. He also found that the
name Amazon.com (co-named after one of the
largest rivers in the world) was chosen by the
founder because it was fitting to his vision of
building the largest online store in the world.
The Early Breakthrough of Amazon.com
According to [2] Amazon went public at $18
per share, giving it a valuation of $300 million.
However, after adjusting for three subsequent
stock splits, the closing stock price of Amazon on
their first day of trading was $1.96. The Podean
Marketplace on its website (June 2020) validated
the above fact but also emphasized that If one
were to have invested $1,000 into Amazon
shares (IPO) in 1997, those shares would have
grown in value to over $1,137,000 by the end of
2019. This illustration was done to provide
further insight into the level of breakthrough
Amazon has achieved.
[3], in his paper, disclosed that by December
of 1996, Amazon’s customer base had grown to
an impressive 180,000, and by October of the
following year, this figure had leaped to around
1,000,000 registered accounts. He also disclosed
that Amazon’s revenues had reached around
$148 million in 1997, a significant jump from
around $16 million in 1996. Prior to this time,
Amazon had remained a private company. But
Bezos soon realized that to sustain the
company’s growth, and he would need more than
just private investment. To this end, in 1997,
Amazon.com went public and was able to raise a
whopping $54 million on the NASDAQ
exchange. In addition to the cash, the company
leveraged on its high-flying stock to fund its
aggressive growth and acquisition strategy. By
1998, Amazon’s revenues had reached a record
$600 million.
Amazon’s outstanding rise within such a short
period of time catapulted Bezos into prominence.
He was also chosen to be Time magazine’s 1999
Person of the Year.
According to [2], as the demand for their
products and services increased, Amazon
unveiled a second distribution center in
November 1997 at New Castle, Delaware, in
order to widen to market coverage. The business
soon spread to China, Germany, UK, etc. to
about 152 countries of the world.
[4] found that Amazon expanded rapidly in
other areas as well. Its Associates program,
which provides a platform for other Web sites to
offer merchandise for sale, whereby
Amazon.com would fill the order and pay a
commission, grew from a mere site in 1996 to
more than 350,000 by 1999. [5], further reveals
that In 2000, the U.S. toy retailer Toys "R" Us
signed a 10-year business agreement with
Amazon, valued at $50 million per year, under
which Toys "R" Us would be the sole supplier of
toys and baby products on the service, and the
brand’s website would redirect to Amazon’s
Toys & Games category.
Financial Records and Performance of
Amazon.com
[3] and other researchers agree that
Amazon.com did not make a single profit until
the last quarter of 2001, despite the huge success
that characterized the business venture. [4] added
that this situation appeared to justify the early
criticism and scepticism that met with the
3
business at the onset from financial journalists
and analysts who even went to the extent of
referring to the company as Amazon. Bomb;
Many of them claimed Amazon.com ultimately
would lose in the marketplace to established
bookselling chains, such as Borders and Barnes
& Noble, once they launched competing ecommerce sites, and the lack of profits until 2001
looked like a confirmation to these predictions.
Moreover, [6] confirmed that the company did
make its first quarterly profit of $5.8 million in
the fourth quarter of 2001, but this was dwarfed
by large cumulative losses. He further presented
the historical income statements, historical
balance sheets, and the historical cash flow
statements of the company from 1997 – 2001 as
follows:
1. Sales grew from $147 million in 1997 to
about $3.1 billion in 2001.
2. The average growth rate during this period
was 141%.
3. The gross margin during this period had
averaged 21.68%.
4. The ratio of marketing expenses to sales
revenue had decreased from 16.33% in 1997
to 4.43% in 2001.
5. Interest expenses had risen from $326,000 in
1997 to $139 million in the year 2001.
6. Loss from operations had increased from
$32,595 in 1997 to $412,257 in the year
2001.
7. Sales from books, music, and video had
levelled off. But this was a very profitable
segment. On the other hand, the electronics,
tools, and kitchen segment were growing
rapidly- but were not very profitable.
According to the Amazon financialstatements
published by Macrotrends [7], Amazon has gone
ahead to remain profitable from 2001 till date. A
review of the financial statements of the
company in the last six years shows that the
company generated a net profit of $8.5 billion in
2015, which grew to $12.3 billion in 2016, and
further grew to $15.5 billion in 2017, and then to
$27.7 billion in 2018 and further grew to $36.3
billion in 2019 and finally grew to $48.1 billion
in 2020. Although the year 2020 came with a
global lockdown that resulted in a global
economic crisis which led to a massive collapse
of businesses, job losses, and an increase in the
cost of operation as a result of palliatives,
rebates, and welfare of workers, Amazon.com
remained significantly profitable.
The mere fact that the company survived for
six whole years without making any profit from
its inception attests to the financial competence
of the Management and the formidability of the
business model and strategies.
Products & Services of Amazon.com
A study of the research work of [3] and others
on the products and service line of Amazon
revealed that at the onset of the company, Jeff
Bezos (Founder) knew he wanted to build an
online retail market, but he wasn’t sure what
exactly to sell on the platform, however, after
some research and consultations, he settled for
books because they were easier to source,
package and distribute. But then, Amazon was
not the first company to hit on this business
strategy. Another company, Computer Literacy
(a Silicon Valley bookstore), commenced sales
of its own wares online as far back as 1991, but
the difference with the business model and
approach of Amazon.com was that it offered
users greater convenience, as it was structured to
deliver online orders directly to the customer’s
address anywhere in the world.
Moreover, [4], discovered that although
Amazon.com famously started as a bookseller,
Bezos maintained from its inception that the
platform was not merely a retailer of consumer
products. On several occasions, he was found
saying that Amazon.com was a technology
company whose business was simplifying online
transactions for consumers. And as a result of
this, the company will begin selling more than
just books. The company commenced the sales
of music and video in 1998. Within the same year
(1998), it commenced its operations
4
internationally with the acquisition of online
booksellers in countries such as the United
Kingdom and Germany. In the year 1999, the
company had commenced the sales of consumer
electronics, video games, and other related
products. In the year 2002, the company
introduced the sales of fashion-related products
and further launched Amazon Web Services
(AWS); a service that initially offered statistical
data on Internet traffic patterns, most visited
websites, and other relevant statistics for
developers and marketers. In the year 2006, the
company widened its AWS portfolio by
integrating the Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2), a
service that rents out computer processing power
in small or large increments. That same year, the
Simple Storage Service (S3); a service that rents
data storage over the Internet, was included in
their overall package. S3 and EC2 recorded
immediate success and helped to propagate the
idea that companies and individuals do not need
to own computing resources; they can rent them
as needed over the Internet, or “in the cloud.” For
example, in 2007, immediately after launch, the
S3 service had over 10 billion objects or files;
five years later, it held over 905 billion objects.
Today, AWS is serving a few of Amazon’s major
rivals, such as the likes of Netflix, which makes
use of both S3 and EC2 to compute its video
streaming service.
[4] , further revealed that when Bezos founded
his company Amazon.com, the strategy was not
to move inventory around. However, in order to
establish a measure of control over deliveries, the
company in 1997 started keeping inventory in its
warehouses. In the year 2000, the company
introduced a system that allows small companies
and individuals to market and sell their products
through the resources of Amazon.com. By the
year 2006, it had commenced its FBA
(Fulfilment by Amazon) service, a service that
manages the inventory of businesses that market
and sell their product through Amazon.com. The
growth of its inventory-management business
influenced its purchase of Kiva Systems (a
robotics company whose devices automate
inventory-fulfilment duties) at a whooping sum
of $775 million in 2012. In 2007 Amazon.com
introduced the sales of its own Kindle e-readers,
which helped energize the e-book market. In the
year 2011, the company launched a related but
affordable tablet computer: the Kindle Fire, and
by 2012, the Kindle Fire was estimated to have
accounted for over 50 percent of the tablets sold
with Google’s Android mobile operating system.
After operating its first full year of selling
books in 1996, publishing firms commended the
new service as a leverage for them to clear their
backlog of slow-selling books. In the year 2009,
the first publishing line of the company, known
as Amazon Encore was introduced, and it gave
priority to popular self-published books as well
as books that are out of print. It also afforded
individuals the liberty to publish their own ebooks. In the year 2011, its e-book drive resulted
to the emergence of Amazon Publishing, which
was set up with the goal to develop and publish
its own titles. That year, it was discovered that
the e-books on Kindle were outselling the printed
books. Although many book publishers has
continued to enjoy revenue surge through sales at
Amazon.com, the company is however seen as a
major competitor in their industry.
In the year 2017, Amazon.com disclosed that
it has reached an agreement to acquire the
supermarket chain – Whole Foods Market, Inc.,
in a deal valued at over $13 billion. Nonetheless,
despite the fact that they have reached out well
beyond online retailing, the larger chunk of the
company’s revenues are generated through the
sales of products online (though its most
profitable segment remains AWS), and that has
been the target for most of its investment. Over
the years, the company has either acquired or
invested hugely in many online retailers, such as
the renowned shoe seller Zappos, which was
purchased for $847 million in 2009.
Perhaps one of the most successful and
profitable initiatives of Amazon, as seen in the
research work of [2], is the $79-a-year loyalty
5
program that includes free two-day shipping on
any order, announced by Jeff Bezos in 2005.
Today, Amazon Prime has more than 100 million
members worldwide, and it is considered as one
of Amazon’s most valuable assets. According to
the Podean marketplace, Prime has proven to be
a massive success: it now has more than 112
million members across the globe. The
beginning of Amazon Prime resulted to the
widespread of concept of customer appreciation
and loyalty towards the company. The vision and
goal of the company on customer obsession and
ultimate customer satisfaction became a reality
through the Prime project. To put it simply, the
convenience and ease that Amazon Prime offers
is the ultimate expression of Amazon’s quest to
deliver absolute satisfaction to its customers. In
the year 2019, an average member of Amazon
Prime in the U.S. spent about $1,400 on Amazon.
[2] also has it that after being blamed for the
decline of independent bookstores across the
country, Amazon in 2015 opened its own
physical retail location in Seattle. The store was
opened as part of their strategy to market the
company’s growing list of electronic devices as
well as to sell their books. Amazon currently
owns and controls about fifteen major bookstores
in the United States.
According to [5], In November 2020, the
company started an online delivery service
exclusively for prescribed drugs. The service
provides discounts of up to 80% for generic
drugs and up to 40% for branded drugs for active
Prime users. The products are available for
purchase on the company’s website or at over
50,000 bricks-and-mortar pharmacies in the
United States.
As at today, Amazon.com has successfully
developed a number of products and services
available, some of which include: AmazonFresh,
Amazon Prime, Amazon Web Services, Alexa,
Appstore, Amazon Drive, Echo, Kindle, Fire
Tablets, Fire TV, Video, Kindle Store, Music,
Music Unlimited, Amazon Digital Game Store,
Amazon Studios and AmazonWireless.
The Business Concept and Strategies of
Amazon.com
A review of the research work of [6] the
reason behind the initial location of the company
in Seattle, as revealed by the founder, was
because of the availability of a large pool of
technical talent and its closeness to one of the
largest book wholesalers within the region at
Roseburg Oregon. This actually confirms the
fact that at the onset, he was thinking about the
company as a bookseller. In addition to this, the
sales tax laws for online retailers at the time was
also a contributory factor in deciding the location
of the company. As a result of this, cities like
New York and California were ruled out of the
options. This particular decision led to the quick
growth of Amazon, because the possibility of
stiff competition, which is a major growth threat,
was eliminated from the onset.
[6], further disclosed that at the first attempt to
name the company, the name Cadabra was
chosen by Bezos. However, he would later
discontinue with this choice when it was
erroneously written as cadaver by a lawyer he
engaged. He chose Amazon considering that it
begins with the letter A, which is not only easy to
apprehend and spell, but also signifies something
big. According to the Podean Marketplace
(2020), the decision to go with the name Amazon
was later followed by Bezos because the name
was taken from the largest river in the world
(River Amazon in South America), which
depicts his vision to build the largest bookstore
in the world. The idea was crystallized while he
was going through the dictionary, giving
attention and priority to names that began with
the letter “A” because he believed this would be
to the advantage of the company to be listed
higher in alphabetized lists. This reflects the
leadership quality of the founder of Amazon,
which explains why Amazon has remained at the
top since it got there.
Various researchers, including [4], reveal that
although Amazon.com famously started as a
bookseller, Bezos maintained from the start that
6
the company was more than that. He always
brought the wider perspective of what
Amazon.com represents, which according to him
was a tech company operating with the goal of
offering simplicity and convenience to
consumers in doing online transactions. Their
inclusion of more and more products widened
their reach to more and more customers. This
also reflects the leadership quality of the founder
and explains the reason why the company
introduced many other products and services that
eventually positioned the company to become
profitable with a record of consistent and
significant growth from 2001 till date.
[6], presented the two elements of Amazon’s
vision as follows:
1. To build the world’s most customer-centric
company.
2. To establish a place where customers could
buy anything.
In the words of Bezos, the vision was
presented thus– “Our goal is to be Earth’s most
customer-centric company. I will leave it to
others to say if we’ve achieved that. But why?
The answer is three things: The first is that
customer-centric means figuring out what your
customers want by asking them, then figuring out
how to give it to them, and then giving it to them.
That’s the traditional meaning of customercentric, and we’re focused on it. The second is
innovating on behalf of customers, figuring out
what they don’t know they want and giving it to
them. The third meaning, unique to the Internet,
is the idea of personalization: Redecorating the
store for each and every individual customer. If
we have 10.7 million customers, as we did at the
end of the last quarter, then we should have 10.7
million stores.” Again, the leadership quality of
the founder is seen here, and Amazon has been
able to effectively achieve this vision with the
Amazon Prime project. This is the key strategy
behind the success of Amazon.
[3] reports that the main goal of Amazon at the
onset was to simply to offer convenience. The
ease of searching, selecting, purchasing, and
taking delivery of products from the comfort of
your home, was an amazing innovation at the
time. Another selling point for Amazon at the
time was its recommended product function. By
marketing products with the purchase history of
users, they were able to significantly grow their
revenue. The inclusion of initiatives such as
product reviews by existing users further helped
to foster a kind of "customer community" that
made the site, and its wares, more appealing to
potential customers.
Research Approach
This primary objective of this research was to
investigate the strategy(s) behind the business
success of Amazon.com, the largest online retail
store in the world. The research was a basic one,
but not new because numerous pieces of
academic and business research exists, regarding
the remarkable successstory of Amazon.com. As
such, the proposed research took the form of a
new research but on an existing research subject.
In order to fulfill and satisfy the above objective,
a combination of qualitative and quantitative
research approaches was used. Although this
research is more qualitative because of the
exploratory nature of the objective, however,
quantitative data was also used to support some
of the facts, figures, and statistics, like the
financial statements of the company for the past
20 years. The research was be developed
completely with secondary data that are
descriptive in nature since all of the data needed
have already been provided by previous
researchers and from other valid sources like the
company’s website and Wikipedia.com.
Data Collection
In order to extensively answer the research
question, existing data (documents, records,
publications, etc.) was relied upon, since there
are numerous data that have been put together
already about the company by other researchers,
due to the attention attracted by the company as
a result of its remarkable success in the business
and economic space. Hence, all the other forms
7
of data collection was unnecessary for this
research work. Materials that covered areas such
as the history of the company, the business
strategies and policies of the company – fully
capturing the vision and mission statement of the
company, as well as the financial statements of
the company and records of key interviews with
the founder and CEO of the company, was
analysed in the research. Many of the data used
were produced and published directly by the
company (like the financial statements), while
others were developed and published by other
researchers. The materials were gathered from
valid and trusted sources such as the company’s
website, Wikipedia, and other business-related
websites and research papers.
Data Analysis
The data collected was analyzed using the
content and thematic data analysis method. The
data was broken down into about five different
themes, and each theme was developed
according to the most consistent information
from the data.
Results
The study so far has led us to the answer to the
research question. The success of Amazon is
hinged on three key strategies:
1. Customer Centricity
2. Technology Focused
3. Exceptional Management
Amazon is known today as the largest and
most successful e-commerce retailer in the
western world, and they achieved this by
building the best customer experience. The
motto and mantra of Amazon is customer
happiness. The mission statement captures it
thus: do whatever it takes to make the customer
happy. Amazon has embraced and deployed the
best technologies available in achieving its
mission. Initiatives like Amazon Prime, Amazon
Robotics, the Buy Box, and a whole lot of other
initiatives that define the remarkable success of
the company are technology-based. More so, the
consistency of the owner and the team of
Management experts at Amazon in pursuing the
above vision and mission statements to date
reflects the impact of running a business with an
exceptional team of Management, and how such
strategy can contribute significantly to the
success of the business.
Discussion
The above-identified success strategies will
each be discussed and analysed in line with
Amazon’s operations and activities. However,
the key strategy that has contributed to the
success of this company is Customer
Centricity, and the other strategies were only
developed to ensure this strategy is not only
realized but realized in an unprecedented
manner. Today, the success of Amazon has
drawn the attention of the business world to the
importance of making customers a priority as a
strategy ofsuccess, and this idea has since grown
into a business principle that is widely accepted
by all available business research.
Customer Centricity
Customer centricity is an organizational
strategy, model, and mind-set that places
customers, rather than product or sales, at the
center of the business. When a business is
operated with a customer-centric culture, it
doesn’t think of customer-centricity as
something to achieve later, neither do they think
of it as the outcome of good customer service
delivery. They approach customer experience
strategically and intentionally, such that the
customer is enthroned from the start. An
organization that is customer-centric operates in
such a way that every person and process within
the entire organization: whether or not they are
customer-facing, are involved in planning and
delivering the customer experience. In a
customer-centric setting, every employee is
trained to focus on the delivery of exceptional
customer experience in order to build loyalty and
encourage repeat business. Although people
often think about customer experience solely
within the context of customer service, sales,
8
marketing etc., it goes beyond that. True
customer-centricity is an organizational
approach where the job of every employee
(including those that do not interface with
customers directly), is done in the best interest of
the customer. In a customer-centric organization,
the customer is the priority and the center, and
every employee functions with this
understanding and focus. This is vital in
achieving business success in the long term. The
focus in decision-making and policy direction
always puts quality customer experience at the
center. There is a close relationship between the
customer service practices of a company and its
profits; according to [8], customer-centric
companies are 60% more profitable than their
counterparts. Customer centricity can be well
explained with the aid of the following diagrams
that present an accurate picture of what the
concept is all about:
Figure 1. Habits of Customer-Centric Organizations
Figure 2. Customer Centricity
9
Customer Centricity as described above
involves putting the customer at the center of the
vision statement of the company, as well as on
the normal daily processes (such as the
products/services offered, the mode of
communication, the channels adopted, etc.) in
order to strengthen the customer relationship.
There are three key elements that drive the
concept of customer-centricity. The first element
is customer experience. This is the sum of all
experiences or interactions a customer has with a
company, both online and offline. The second
element is customer value, and this refers to the
total value of a customer, both actual and
potential value, both directly and indirectly
(referral value like promoting a company, the
influence on social media, etc.), and the third
element is a customer life cycle, which refers to
the evolution a customer goes through as defined
by one or more aspects related to his or her needs
(life stages, lifestyle, and relationship with
company).
The Culture of Customer Centricity in
Amazon
The description of the concept of customer
centricity reflects the actual business practice of
Amazon in its entirety. The business model and
decision-making processes of Amazon are a
practical definition of customer-centricity. For
example, the key element of the vision of the
organization is to build the world’s most
customer-centric company, and to a very large
extent, this vision has been achieved today.
The approach to the successful
implementation of this strategy is known as the
Amazon Flywheel, and it is summarized below:
There are three major things customers
consider when buying products online:
1. Large Selection: This ensures that
consumers are able to find the products they
are looking for.
2. Low Price: This ensures that the product is
affordable to consumers.
3. Fast Delivery: This ensures that the
consumers get their orders quickly.
If customers are given a quality (and
consistent)shopping experience online, they will
always return again and again and also refer their
friends. This generates Traffic. Sellers will
always flow with traffic, because they need to
market their products to potential consumers.
More sellers mean more product selection.
More product selection means a better
Customer Experience (they have everything).
With three of these elements in place, the growth
of the platform is assured because of economies
of scale, which implies lower cost structure,
leading to lower prices, and the final outcome
will be the ultimate growth cycle, achieved by
offering the best Customer Experience to
customers. Amazon’s success was established on
service to the customer and the customer alone.
Product Selection
Having the world’slargeststore entails having
the world’s best selection. But, this is easier said
than done. The smaller number of products
results in higher margins and higher returns
while many others generate very little or none at
all in most stores and product line. This is known
as: the Fathead versus the Longtail problem.
Limiting your product selection to those highdemand high ticket items as they generate the
most profit might be tempting. The issue,
however is that these high ticket items are not
what consumers buy every day, and when they
do, they always buy them from a retailer that is
known and trusted. To build consumer’s trust,
you will have to offer a series of consistent and
positive shopping experiences. Amazon seeks to
earn consumer’s loyalty so that they buy
everything there. Amazon’s success depends on
the fact that it is two very different but
seamlessly integrated shopping places at once: A
store, like Walmart (with Vendors providing
products to Amazon) and a marketplace, like
eBay (with Sellers selling directly to consumers).
10
Price Factor
Pricing is one of the most important factor that
drives sales. As part of their commitment to
provide a quality consumers’ experience, they
aim to offer the lowest price on the internet. They
are succeeding with this. The Buy Box fosters
competition within the platform to keep prices
low. The Buy Box is a feature that has helped to
keep the Amazon user interface tidy despite
hosting a variety of sellers on the platform.
It works in such a way that each unique
product has only one product page despite
representing several listings. When the “buy”
button is clicked by a user, the purchase is
automatically directed to the seller who has won
the Buy Box (red). The implication is that
winning the Buy Box gives the seller a
significant sales advantage, with the chances of
winning about 85% of the sales for that particular
item. The remaining sellers without the Buy Box
will have to compete on the other 15% of the
sales. Three key factors determine the winner of
the Buy Box – price, rating, and delivery speed.
To offer comparatively low pricing as a seller is
one of the important determinants of winning the
Buy Box. Uncompetitive pricing will
significantly affect sales.
Delivery Factor
Asides from low pricing, the major delight of
online consumers is quick delivery. Maintaining
records of quick deliveries is instrumental in
creating a consistent and reliable shopping
experience. This is a challenge for many
businesses.
There may be little (or no) infrastructure
available in a business to achieve this,
irrespective of the fact that they may be
accustomed to selling only in bulk shipments or
operating in a very small scale. These diverse
circumstances notwithstanding, many users find
it hard to distinguish between items “sold by
Amazon” and “marketplace purchases”. The
implication is that for Amazon to get a consistent
result, their shipping strategy will be adopted in
selling other products.
The above arrangement is what is known as
Fulfilment by Amazon (FBA). Controlling the
process ofstoring, picking, packing and shipping
enables Amazon to ensure that consumers get a
quality delivery experience, and at the same time
offering a solution to the sellers, who usually will
struggle to deliver their goods going by the tough
standards of Amazon.
This means that Amazon can always
guarantee quick and accurate delivery as often as
always. Any seller that opts in must ensure that
their products are eligible for free shipping and
Prime. Amazon Prime involves a subscription
model that offers a 2-day free shipping on
selected products. The service can currently be
accessed in the United States, United Kingdom,
Germany, Austria, India, Japan, Italy, Spain, and
France. Amazon’s idea is that the quicker the
products arrive, the happier customers will be.
This certainly seems to be true. Sellers often
target to be listed on the Prime because it
increases the likelihood of landing the Buy Box
– and the lion’s share of sales.
Amazon’s brand is built on customer
satisfaction. The goal is to earn the record of
being the most customer-friendly company on
the entire planet. The implication is that Amazon
will be positioned as the company that offers the
most convenience with the lowest prices and the
best customer service out there.
The Results of Customer Centricity at
Amazon
Amazon’s strength is found in their relentless
effort and commitment towards achieving a
quality customer experience. Everything that
Amazon does: every strategic move, every
investment, is guided by its goal to be the most
customer-centric company in the world. Every
step, decision, and policy are geared towards
benefiting and serving customers as best as
possible. A lot of positive results have followed
11
this initiative, some of which will be highlighted
below:
Data
The sheer amount of data that Amazon has on
consumers is mind-boggling. Beyond using the
data to improve the efficiency of operations and
improve the product offering, Amazon also sells
the data for the purpose of publicity and
advertisement through the Amazon DSP
program.
Prime Membership
Consumers love Amazon, and there is high
customer loyalty to the company, especially
among the Prime members. Consumer
Intelligence Research Partners (CIRP)
discovered in their recent survey that over 100
million people resident in the United States have
Amazon Prime accounts.\
The data also shows that approximately 58%
of Amazon Prime Members pay the full $119
yearly fee, while 36% pay for the monthly fee,
and the remaining 6% are on a free trial. Further
data from CIRP has shown that Amazon Prime
members spend double the amount spent by nonprime members do—averaging $1,400 per
annum.
Worldwide Recognition
Amazon wields enormous power in whatever
new market it enters. Amazon’s global brand
recognition provides them with such leverage
that it poses a danger to new markets. Amazon
presently has a 31 percent market share in
Germany. In the United Kingdom, the company
has a 47 percent market share.
So far, Amazon has achieved and still
achieving this goal, and this has resulted to a
strong brand. In 2019, about 2,000 US shoppers
were surveyed, and it was shown that about 89%
of the customers prefer to buy their products
from Amazon than from other e-commerce sites.
The survey also discovered that Amazon was
designed in such a way that it had become
indispensable in the customer’s journey, this is
proven through their customer review system.
According to [9] : Two-thirds of respondents
(66%) often begin their search for new products
on Amazon, whereas one-fifth (20%) begin on a
search engine such as Google. When shoppers
are ready to buy a specific product, 74% go
straight to Amazon.
Customer Centricity and Corporate
Social Responsibility (CSR)
A comparison of the speech of Amazon’s
CEO in their annual report of 1997 after the
company went public, and the speech of theCEO
in their annual report of 2020 when the whole
world experienced a deadly pandemic, reveals
how consistent the company has been in
achieving its vision of customer-centricity, and it
also depicts the length they are willing to go to
sustain this legacy. Amazon had clearly gone
beyond creating the best experiences for their
customers, to taking responsibility for their
customers’ welfare and survival when it mattered
most through a measure of palliatives and CSR
programs.
Highlights of the CEO Speech in the 1997
Annual Report
Amazon.com passed many milestones in
1997, and by the end of that year, more than 1.5
million customers had been served, yielding
838% revenue growth to $147.8 million, and the
market leadership was extended despite the
aggressive competition.
The excerpts from Jeff Bezos speech in the
1997 annualreport retrieved from [10]shed more
light on the extent Amazon has gone (and is
willing to go) in their customer-centric approach.
Highlights of the CEO’s regarding
Amazon’s response to the COVID-19
pandemic
At the peak of the negative after-effects of
COVID-19 in the year 2020, Jeff Bezos gave a
rousing speech in this report to motivate, inform
and forge a direction for staff, clients and
12
shareholders. This further shows how far the
company can go in maintaining their customercentricity approach. The excerpts from the
speech can be found in [11].
Technology
In building a business that provides the best
customer experience in the world, one strategy
Amazon has embraced and deployed greatly to
achieve this feat is focusing and leveraging on
technology. The technology involves deploying
scientific knowledge for practical purposes such
as use in industry and other areas of life. In
essence, anytime we use scientific knowledge to
some productive end (to achieve a particular
purpose), technology was in operation.
Technology covers the actions taken to meet
human needs, while science is concerned with
the understanding of how the natural world
works. It can also be seen as the collection of
techniques, skills, methods, and processes which
can be deployed towards the production of goods
or services and also for the accomplishment of
specific objectives. The knowledge of
techniques, processes, and the like is one aspect,
while the embedding of the processes and
techniques towards the operation of machine or
equipment without the knowledge of their
workings is another aspect. The Internet is a very
good example of technology because makes
information available in real-time, which is
accessible by anyone anywhere in the world in a
matter of seconds.
The Results of Technology Investment at
Amazon
One of the frequently asked questions about
the operations of Amazon is how they manage to
deliver so quickly, given the volume and the
scope of their transactions. The answer to this
question lies in their use of sophisticated
technology. Amazon is currently controlling one
of the major Fulfilment networks in the world,
and this is as a result of the following:
1. Advanced Logistics.
2. Innovative technology, powered by Amazon
Robotics.
3. 175 fulfilment centres worldwide operating
24 hours.
Logistics: The logistics system of Amazon is
completely superior to any other logistics system
available in the world, and this is one of the major
factors that has enhanced their ability to achieve
the goal of becoming the World’s foremost
customer-centric company. Amazon has
invested heavily into logistical systems such as
their various distribution centers near large cities
in the world, advanced expert systems (robotics)
for improved efficiency, etc.
Agility: Amazon has the capacity to make
quick decisions, irrespective of its size. This
enables them to always stay ahead of the game.
This is achieved by a couple of built-in systems
that ensure promptness and flexibility in their
decision-making process. An example of such a
system is the “two-pizza rule,” which maintains
problem-solving teams in a given number and
encourages quick decision-making.
The reality is that the best in the world is not
even second to Amazon. Currently, the company
is making significant investments in new
technologies, including Artificial Intelligence, to
improve upon this already impressive system
which surpasses that of long-standing logistics
and shipping companies. This is one competitive
edge that might be very hard to replicate.
In a pressrelease dated March 4
th
, 2020, on the
Amazon website, there was a detailed
breakdown of the milestones they accomplished
in their response to the outbreak of the COVID19 through the aid of technology.
Excerpts from this press release can be found
in [12].
Exceptional Management
The CEO of Amazon – Jeff Bezos, is one of
the best CEO’s in the world today and has won
the award for the best CEO in the world a number
of times, especially during the early years of
Amazon. His ideologies and consistency in
13
pursuing the vision of the company are quite
impressive. A review of his speech to the public
for the past 23 years has remained progressive
and consistent in achieving Amazon’s vision.
Bezos successfully built a Management team and
inculcated in them the same enthusiasm and
commitment towards achieving the Amazon
vision, and he has successfully worked with them
all these years to drive the company to its present
level of success. This collaboration between a
like-minded team of Management towards
achieving the same goals and vision is one of the
key strategies behind the huge success of the
business.
Amazon has a policy of repeatedly testing
ideas before streamlining their options to the
most effective. The company is not afraid of
failing when it comes to investing in the
development of a product or service, even if there
is a risk of failure surrounding that investment.
Below are some of the highlights of some of
the comments of Jeff Bezos, which reflects a
picture of the ideologies and commitment of the
Management to the goal and vision and Amazon.
“The philosophy of Jeff Bezos is summarized
in what he calls “Day 1” and “Day 2”. This idea
was conceived during the early days of the
company. The building they occupied at the time
was called “Day 1”, and this name was given as
a reminder that the company should always
maintain “Day 1” mode in its functionality. The
concept of "Day 2″ is seen as a reversal of the
“Day 1” concept, which is usually followed by
irrelevance, as a result of a painful and
excruciating process of decline and death.”
“It remains Day 1.” This statement was used
to sign off the letter to the shareholders at
Amazon by the Founder and CEO, Jeff Bezos.
Bezos has promoted the “day 1” mantra for
decades, and he says it as a reminder that the
company should always operate like a start-up,
even though the company has now grown in
leaps and bounds.
Excerpts of the CEO COVID-19 speech in
2020 further reflected the strategic Management
of the company by maintaining employee
welfare and satisfaction; ensuring the safety of
their employees. See [13] for further details.
The Next Level in Delivering Customer
Experience – Beyond Covid
From the Jeff Bezos COVID speech in 2020,
he further stated a variety of steps in achieving
the vision and mission of Amazon. It was clearly
presented to the public in the following headings:
1. Meet the Goals of the Paris Agreement on
Climate Balance
2. Investment in Electric Vehicles to Achieve
Climate Balance
3. Investment in Renewable Energy to Achieve
Climate Balance
4. Investment in Packaging Waste
Management & Delivery Network to
Achieve Climate Balance
5. Investment in Efficient Data Centers to
Achieve Climate Balance
For a full exposition on each of the steps, visit
[14] for the foundational mission that powers this
new pledge detailed in [15].
Conclusion
Amazon has become a household name in
both books and music industries. It occupies a
very high position of advantage amongst other
smaller competitors. The company has achieved
a remarkable feat in both books and the music
market for life. It has expanded its operations as
well as its profitability successfully by providing
the best E-commerce ever, through proper
knowledge of its customers, as well as the
longevity of the relationships with its customers
by providing a quality customer experience.
These three aspects promise to keep Amazon
conveniently afloat as well as to retain their
dominant position in the industry, regardless of
the competition they face.
It would be very tough and discouraging to
keep up with Amazon, especially for smaller
companies in the industry. They will have to restrategize by offering e-retail services that can
compete with what is available in the market.
14
This will be a pre-condition for their success in
the industry. They will also need to find a way to
ensure customer loyalty for the sake consistency.
Amazon has succeeded in building a perfect
consumer system/platform. Their services offer
much more than other platforms, while their
charges are a lot more less than others (perhaps
the lowest in the industry). They offer the best
selection through the combination of a retailbased business and a marketplace kind of
business; they offer the best price through the
“buybox,” initiative, and they ensure the quickest
delivery through the FBA initiative offered to
their sellers. They operate an effective business
strategy known as “flywheel”, which means that
the more successful Amazon becomes, the more
potential for they have to be successful.
The fact that Amazon currently controls about
50% of the market share in the United States
alone and growing shows that their future in the
industry is guaranteed. The implication of this is
that as Amazon experiences further growth in the
industry, this would lead to the growth of
Amazon’s sellers and vendors. Amazon’s
tendency to further evolve and grow is based on
the fact that they are a platform, a seller and a
brand all at once.
As it stands, the only way to effectively
compete with Amazon will be to provide equal
and better services and value in relation to their
most important success metric: pleasing the
customer, which currently seems impossible.
Acknowledgment
My acknowledgement goes to God Almighty
for the opportunity to be alive to undertake a
program.
I acknowledge Texila American University
for providing the platform. My
acknowledgement especially goes to the faculty
and all my academic mentors for their assistance
and help to complete this project.
I acknowledge my external guide, Dr.
Anthony Orji, for making out time to assist in the
completion and correctness of the project.
Conflict of Interest
The author certifies that there is NO affiliation
with (or involvement in) any organization or
entity that has any financial interest (such as
honoria; educational grants; participation in
speakers’ bureaus; membership, employment,
consultancies, stock ownership, or other equity
interest; and expert testimony or patent-licensing
arrangements), or non-financial interest (such as
personal or professional relationships,
affiliations, knowledge or beliefs) in the subject
matter or the materials discussed in this
manuscript.
References
[1] Zana Majed Sadq et al (2018), Analyzing the
Amazon success strategies, (PDF) Analyzing the
Amazon success strategies (researchgate.net),
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/328689933
_Analyzing_the_Amazon_success_strategies.
[2] Lydia Depillis and Ivory Sherman (2018), CNN,
Amazon’s extraordinary evolution - CNN.com,
https://edition.cnn.com/interactive/2018/10/business/
amazon-history-timeline/index.html.
[3]Christopher Mcfadden (2021), A Very Brief
History of Amazon: The Everything Store, A Very
Brief History of Amazon: The Everything Store | IE
(interestingengineering.com),
https://interestingengineering.com/a-very-briefhistory-of-amazon-the-everything-store.
[4] Mark Hall (2021), Amazon.Com, Whole Foods
Market | History & Facts | Britannica
[5] Wikipedia (2021), Amazon (Company),
Wikipedia the free Encyclopedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_(company).
[6] Sandeep Krishnamurthy (2002), Case #1-
Amazon.Com- A Business History1 To Appear In-
“E-Commerce Management: Text And Cases,”
https://paginas.fe.up.pt/ipc/suporte/varios/amazon_fi
nal.pdf.
15
[7] Amazon Financial Statements 2005-2021,
AMZN, MacroTrends,
https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/AMZN/a
mazon/financial-statements.
[8]Cormac Hughes (2014), Deloitte, Customercentricity Embedding it into your organisation’s
DNA,
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/ie/
Documents/Strategy/2014_customer_centricity_delo
itte_ireland.pdf.
[9] Kiri Masters,(2019), Forbes, 89% Of Consumers
Are More Likely To Buy Products From Amazon
Than Other E-Commerce Sites: Study,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/kirimasters/2019/03/2
0/study-89-of-consumers-are-more-likely-to-buyproducts-from-amazon-than-other-e-commercesites/?sh=7c3074024af1.
[10]Jeff Bezos (1997), Amazon, Jeff Bezos’ 1997
Letter to Shareholders,
https://s2.q4cdn.com/299287126/files/doc_financials
/annual/Shareholderletter97.pdf.
[11]Jeff Bezos (2020) Jeff Bezos’ 2020 Letter to
Shareholders,
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1018724/0
00119312520108427/d902615dex991.htm.
[12]Amazon (2020), Price gouging has no place in
our store,
https://www.aboutamazon.com/news/companynews/price-gouging-has-no-place-in-our-stores.
[13]WashingtonAFP (2020), France24, Amazon
moves to create lab for employee COVID-19 tests,
https://www.france24.com/en/20200410-amazonmoves-to-create-own-lab-for-employee-covid-19-
tests.
[14]Amazon (2020), Jeff Bezos COVID-19 letter to
shareholders, Beyond COVID,
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1018724/0
00119312520108427/d902615dex991.htm.
[15]Amazon (2019). Press release: Amazon Cofounds The Climate Pledge, Setting Goal to Meet the
Paris Agreement 10 Years Early,
https://press.aboutamazon.com/news-releases/newsrelease-details/amazon-co-founds-climate-pledgesetting-goal-meet-paris.
[16]Anke Moerdyck (2012), How customer centric is
your organisation? InSites, https://insitesconsulting.com/blog/how-customer-centric-is-yourorganisation/.
[17]Andy Lane (2019), What is technology? -
OpenLearn - Open University,
https://www.open.edu/openlearn/science-mathstechnology/engineering-andtechnology/technology/what-technology.
[18]Bahadir Kandemirli (2018), Amazon.com’s
Digital Strategies Amazon.Com Case Study,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/326132044
_amazoncom’s_digital_strategies_amazoncom_case
_study.
[19]Brian Roemmele (2017), Forbes, What Is Jeff
Bezos’s "Day 1" Philosophy?
https://www.forbes.com/sites/quora/2017/04/21/wha
t-is-jeff-bezos-day-1-
philosophy/?sh=ee51a8710523.
[20]Grace Baldwin (2020), Amazon, The Strategies
Behind Amazon’s Success,
https://www.omniaretail.com/blog/the-strategiesbehind-amazonssuccess#:~:text=Amazon%20sales%20strategies,off
er%20a%20consistently%20great%20experience.&t
ext=Much%20like%20Amazon%20considers%20cu
stomer,so%20to%20do%20its%20Sellers.
16