Buchko, A. A., Buscher, C., & Buchko, K. J. (2017). Why do good employees stay in bad organizations? Business Horizons, 60(5), 729–739. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2017.06.001

‌


Why do good employees stay in bad organizations?
Author links open overlay panelAaron A. Buchko, Caleb Buscher, Kathleen J. Buchko
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2017.06.001
Get rights and content
Abstract
Family and work are two of society's most important institutions. It is understandable, then, that some similarities would exist between the two. One unfortunate aspect of such relationships is that families and organizations may be abusive to members. When this occurs in familial relationships, research has identified dynamics that keep people in the abusive situation. We consider here how those same dynamics can occur in abusive organizations to identify factors that keep employees in unhealthy work environments. We then examine intervention techniques and concepts that can be used to enable people to recognize an abusive organization, the long-term damage such organizations can inflict on employees, and ways to assist individuals in exiting an abusive organization setting. Our intention is to create awareness of the harm that can be caused by abusive organizations and provide a framework that will enable people caught in a pattern of organizational abuse to understand their choices and behaviors.

Section snippets
Good organizations, bad organizations
Conventional wisdom tells us, as managers, that the most effective way to run an organization is to be friendly and approachable in the eyes of our subordinates. We are encouraged to develop a climate of trust and loyalty based on mutual respect and concern for employees. Companies like Southwest Airlines (an organization based on love, not fear) and Google are touted as paragons of employee-centered organizations. Annual lists of the best companies to work for from Fortune or Forbes stress

Abusive organizations
The abusive organization has been defined as one that “operates with callous disregard for its employees, not even displaying what might be considered a minimum amount of concern for their human needs” (Powell, 1998, p. 95). Also known as employee-abusive organizations (EAOs), these are organizations “in which employees experience persistent harassment and fear at work because of the offensive, intimidating, or oppressive atmosphere” (Lutgen-Sandvik & McDermott, 2008, p. 305). These are

The psychology of abusive relationships
To try and provide some initial insights into our question, we turned to a related question that has been researched extensively in the field of psychology and relationship behavior: Why do people who have been physically battered or abused in their interpersonal relationships choose to stay with their abusive partners? A lot of the collected data contradicts what may seem like a relatively easy, no-brainer decision for most people. Estimates suggest that over 40% of battered or abused women

Why do employees stay in abusive organizations?
Popular business news outlets have covered stories of large, well-known companies and the sometimes questionable approaches these firms take to remain competitive in the market. Abusive organizational behaviors can be traced to the sweatshops of the industrial revolution and were present in the Gilded Age. In more modern history, we see a climate of abuse and low worker morale with Steve Jobs and Apple in the 1990s, Steve Ballmer and Microsoft in the early 2000s, Walmart in the last decade,

What can be done?
In addressing domestic abuse, three strategies have emerged in the field (Wolfe & Jaffe, 1999). These can be analogous to helping those in abusive organizations. The first, primary prevention, seeks to reduce the incidence of abuse before it occurs. Programs aimed at increasing managerial effectiveness through positive management practices and those aimed at improving organization work environments fall into this strategy category. Secondary prevention tries to decrease the prevalence of abuse

Summary
We see, then, that employees who find themselves in abusive organizations are similar to individuals in abusive relationships. The mechanisms that cause people to remain in situations of domestic abuse may be the same ones that cause employees to stay in abusive organizations. Yet we also believe that such situations are inherently unacceptable and that abusing human beings is fundamentally wrong and ought not be tolerated. We also recognize, however, that abusive organizations—like many

References (28)
